Aporia vol. 20 no. 2—2010
The Duality of Existence
Emily AdlAm
On an initial survey of problems in ontology, it can be tempting to
suggest that there are at least two different meanings of existence,
one applying to material entities and the other to abstract entities.
This view has been criticized as philosophically naïve by Peter van Inwagen
among others. However, the inclination remains pervasive and can arise
even from such unexpected sources as the work of Rudolf Carnap. The
structure of internal and external existence statements that Carnap impos-
es on ontological discourse seems to induce a natural division between two
separate frameworks for existence claims, and if no clear existence criteria
uniting these frameworks can be given, we will have to take seriously the
possibility that existence is not univocal.
I. Carnap and Linguistic Frameworks
As part of his attempt to eliminate metaphysics from human dis-
course, Carnap introduces the concept of a linguistic framework, which
lays down the rules for talking about some entity X. Normally when we ask
whether something exists, we are raising an internal existence question,
which is answered by consulting the rules of the relevant framework. Phi-
losophers naturally want to step outside these frameworks and ask whether
the rules are actually correct to tell us that some X exists, but Carnap ar-
gues this is not coherently possible, because we have no way to talk about
X outside the framework used for discussing it. Thus, Carnap contends,
Emily Adlam is a sophomore studying physics and philosophy at the University of
Oxford, with particular interests in the philosophy of relativity and quantum
mechanics. After graduation she hopes to go on to a PhD in theoretical physics.
2 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 3
it is impossible for us to say simpliciter that some entity or kind of entity to be appropriately univocal, it ought to be governed by non-disjunctive
exists. He takes this to be a demonstration that assertions about existence existence criteria that apply both to concrete and to abstract entities. In
are meaningless. search of such criteria, we might first consider W. V. O. Quine’s slogan,
However, a problem arises for Carnap’s analysis when we consider “To be is to be the value of a variable” (708). Less succinctly, Quine is sug-
in more detail what exactly is meant by the term “framework.” Carnap gesting that we should examine the formalization of our theories about the
suggests, for instance, that we can never make an informative claim that world and identify which objects must be in the domain of quantification
numbers exist, because either we are speaking inside the linguistic frame- in order to make the right statements true, and then consider these objects
work used to deal with numbers, in which case it is trivially true that there the ones that exist. However, as van Inwagen notes, Quine’s criterion is
are numbers, or we are speaking outside that framework, in which case not so much a criterion as a tool: it is “the most profitable strategy to fol-
we have no way to make reference to numbers. However, this disregards low in order to get people to make their ontological commitments—or the
the fact that one linguistic framework may be contained within another: it ontological commitments of their discourse—clear” (246). And even in this
seems reasonable to say that the framework of numbers may be contained sense Quine’s criterion is not a hard and fast rule, since as van Inwagen
within a larger framework of mathematical objects whose rules stipulate indicates, theories can be formulated in numerous different ways, so if we
that numbers as a category do exist. Thus we can answer external questions dislike one implied ontological commitment, we can generally find a new
about the existence of numbers by consulting the existence conditions for expression of the theory that avoids the commitment (243). Being the value
mathematical objects in general. of a variable, therefore, is not a sufficient condition for being included in the
Of course this merely pushes us back a step, for Carnap could retreat set of objects which we hold to exist.
to the claim that we cannot say that mathematical objects exist. But for each Nor is it a necessary condition. Most people (at least of the realist
such retreat, we can counter by appealing to some larger framework which persuasion) would agree that there exist a great many objects which no one
contains the framework in question. The regress, however, will not become has ever imagined and which are therefore not the value of a variable in
infinite, because there does seem to be a point beyond which further gen- anyone’s theory. It could be argued that we have some place in our theories
eralization is not possible. When we start with numbers, progressive moves for a variable ranging over things not yet encountered or imagined, but this
to larger frameworks will eventually bring us to the category “abstract enti- is problematic when combined with semantic externalism. If we agree with
ties,” and it is difficult to see what larger framework could contain this, Hilary Putnam that one cannot succeed in referring to an object without
except perhaps a universal one of undifferentiated entities. Similarly, if we having direct or indirect causal contact with it, surely our theories could not
start with a set of material objects, the regress can seemingly continue only quantify over such unknown and unimagined objects. Furthermore, there
as far as “concrete entities,” which will include objects, events, processes, may well be some objects, including bizarre mereological fusions like the
possibly thoughts and minds, and more borderline phenomena such as “trout-turkey,” which are not a part of any current theory (apart from explic-
sounds and rays of light. Carnap’s arguments suggest that it is meaningful itly mereological theories) because they play no useful explanatory or practi-
within the former framework to claim that a certain abstract entity exists,
cal role. However, we would surely not wish to make this a reason to deny
and it is similarly meaningful within the latter framework to claim that a
that they exist at all, on pain of ending up with a definition of existence
certain concrete object exists. However, unless these frameworks are them-
which makes it contingent upon pragmatic value. It seems that Quine’s
selves contained within some even larger framework, we will not be able
criterion cannot provide a full account of our ontological beliefs, since they
to say that abstract or concrete entities exist simpliciter. If no such larger
outrun the theoretical commitments highlighted by the criterion.
framework can be given, existence claims will have to belong either to one
Furthermore, it is overly simplistic to imagine that we first form our
class or to the other in order to have meaning at all.
theories and then read off what exists from them. As a matter of fact, ques-
tions of existence often drive both our acceptance of a theory and the way
II. Existence Criteria we express that theory to ourselves: if some theory involves ontological
commitments that we find extravagant, we will either reject it or look for
Despite these complications, perhaps there is a single framework a better way to express it. It follows that at least some existence conditions
within which the abstract and concrete entity frameworks can be nested—a must be applicable before theory formulation is possible. Of course, no hu-
universal framework for “entities” of any kind. In order for this framework man ever operates completely outside the framework of theory, but neither
4 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 5
can theory be understood as existing prior to all of our cognitive activities. within a certain framework X, and that framework itself might be suffi-
Thus, although Quine’s criterion might be a useful heuristic tool, it cannot ciently mind-independent to be considered existent within some other
be the basic criterion which we use to make decisions about what does or framework Y, but x itself might not qualify as existent within framework
does not exist. Y since Y might apply more stringent existence conditions than X. For
A second potential criterion for existence can be found by consult- instance, perhaps “trout-turkey” fusions exist within the framework deal-
ing a much older philosophical tradition. One of the major motivations ing with mereological fusions, and mereological fusions exist within the
behind the Platonic conception of the forms as existent entities is the fact framework dealing with material entities, but “trout-turkey” fusions do not
that certain universals, such as properties or numbers, seem to be mind- exist within this framework because not all mereological fusions are accept-
independent: “But if the very nature of knowledge changes, at the time able according to its criteria. If this is the case, then the apparent degree
when the change occurs there will be no knowledge, and, according to of existence of an object O can be understood as a measure of the number of
this view, there will be no one to know and nothing to be known: but if frameworks within which that object exists simpliciter. This reply, however,
that which knows and that which is known exist ever, and the beautiful seems to have counterintuitive consequences: if we accept that X exists
and the good and every other thing also exist, then I do not think that within the framework of physical objects and that physical objects exist with-
they can resemble a process of flux, as we were just now supposing” (Plato in the larger framework of material things, but we deny that X’s existence is
715). This notion of mind-independence can be generalized. Our willing- transitive, in some contexts we may be forced to accept such claims as “X
ness to attribute existence increases as the entities concerned become more is a physical object, and physical objects exist, but X does not exist,” which
independent of our minds: very few people would agree that a fictional sounds inconsistent.
character exists, but more would be prepared to say that Newton’s First Law Another possibility is to accept that every subject possesses a criterion
exists, and nearly everyone accepts that numbers do indeed exist. We can dictating how much mind-dependence is acceptable before an object ceases
understand this by observing that there are no external constraints on the to exist, but to deny that all subjects make this cut-off in the same place.
properties of a fictional character, whereas the properties of laws of nature In this case, what we take to be the degree of existence of an object can be
seem to be fixed partly by convention and partly by unalterable facts about understood instead as a measure of the approximate fraction of subjects
observed regularities, and the properties of numbers are entirely outside who would count the object as existent.
human control. Nor does this apply only to abstract objects. Nearly every- Alternatively, we could suggest that though all subjects place the cut-
one is willing to attribute existence to matter or whatever we take the basic off for existence in more or less the same place, they differ in their assess-
stuff of the world to be, and most people will also say that macroscopic ments of the degree to which a given entity is mind-independent. Thus
objects like tables exist, although mereological nihilists claim that these what we take to be the degree of existence of some object can once again be
are already too dependent on our human conventions of composition. interpreted as a measure of the approximate fraction of subjects who would
However, it is common to deny that spatially scattered mereological fu- count the object as existent.
sions such as “trout-turkeys” exist on the grounds that these compositions Finally, we could hold that subjects approximately agree on which
are purely mental, possessing no mind-independent unifying principle. It objects exist and which do not exist, but that we simply confuse mind-
seems then that mind-independence is a major part of what we take to be independence and existence. Objects either exist or do not exist depend-
necessary for existence. ing on whether their degree of mind-independence is above or below the
relevant threshold, but because of the strong association between mind-
independence and existence, it is possible to think wrongly that existence
III. Degrees of Existence
itself is being attributed in degrees in such contexts.
It may be objected that since mind-independence is a matter of de- The choice between these options will depend on further examina-
gree, this approach implies that existence also can be a matter of degree, tion of our linguistic behavior regarding the concept of existence. However,
when surely existence must be an all or nothing affair. As a first response, it is clear that acceptance of the claim that our existence attributions are
we might deny that existence is transitive from one framework to another. related to degree of mind-independence does not commit us to accepting
An item x might be sufficiently mind-independent to be counted as existent that existence itself comes in degrees.
6 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 7
IV. Mind-Independence human control (68). But this exception is compatible with one of the most
common motivations for the growing block theory: the desire to preserve
A further objection to this account is that it implies that minds, free will. I have argued that this construal of mind-independence is compat-
thoughts and even people do not really exist, since they are not mind- ible with a determinist view according to which there is no such thing as
independent. To respond to this, we must clarify the notion of mind-inde- free will, but it is also compatible with a view that does uphold free will. If
pendence. Certainly one cannot specify mental concepts without reference existence is contingent on mind-independence, then anything we can alter
to the mind, but they are nevertheless mind-independent in the sense that does not yet exist, and therefore future events which we have yet to make
they possess fixed properties that we cannot alter at will. Although the decisions about are not fixed.
mind develops in a way that conforms to conscious decisions that we make, It might also be objected that this account of mind-independence
it is nevertheless governed by constraints and limitations which we are pow- depends upon our ability to specify a distinguished present, which is in-
erless to change—in particular, the processes which it has undergone in compatible with the Special Relativity’s claim that simultaneity is relative to
the past are no longer open to alteration. Even a thought, once it is no each observer. But since the question at issue is the present ability of some
longer occurring, has its properties fixed forever; it has a temporal location observer to effect change, we need be concerned only about what is present
which we are powerless to alter. By contrast, a fictional character is mind- relative to this observer. Indeed, this analysis coordinates rather well with
dependent because we are free to alter his properties at will. Of course, we Special Relativity, since the events that a subject is able to influence will
can also alter the properties of a concrete object by physically manipulating be some subset of those which he can reach with a causal signal, i.e., those
it, but that allows us to influence only its future properties: its present and lying in his future lightcone. It may seem problematic that subjects travel-
past properties are beyond our control. Thus we may specify that an entity ing at notably different speeds might give different accounts of what exists;
is mind-independent to the degree that its properties are fixed. for example, something lying in the future of one subject might lie in the
Incompatibilists might worry that strictly speaking, if determinism is present or past of another. Yet this result should not be troubling, because
true, then it is never really within our power to effect any change, which a number of theories of time, including presentism and the growing-block
suggests that on this account everything is mind-independent and there- universe, hold that subjects at different times will make different judgments
fore existent. However, what is important in this context is not freedom about what exists; it is only a trivial extension to suggest that subjects in
of the will, but the causal role played by the human mind as a medium of different frames of reference will also make different judgments about what
change in the properties of certain entities. Whether or not we have the exists. This is not to say that there cannot be a matter of fact about what ex-
ability to freely choose what this change will be is irrelevant: all that matters ists, only that there is an irreducibly perspectival element to existence. We
is that it is within normal human capabilities to make the change. Similarly can usefully make a comparison to Special Relativity: simultaneity in that
it does not matter whether we actually choose to make any changes, since theory is regarded as relative to the observer, yet the facts about what is
capabilities continue to exist even when they are not exercised. simultaneous for any one observer are not up for dispute.
A more serious concern is that this characterization of mind-indepen-
dence forces a certain view of time upon us, since it is present capabilities
V. Mind-Independence of Concrete and Abstract Entities
which are of interest. The theory implies that past events and objects exist
because they are now beyond our conscious control; similarly, it implies
Anthony Quinton writes that “[we] could argue that we count only
that many present events and objects exist because it is now too late for us
those things as real that can be fitted into the one coherent and public
to do anything about them. With respect to the more contentious question
space and time, that such locatability is a criterion of being real. For what
of the future, we can say that future events and objects exist only if they are
is a dream or a fantasy or an illusion of the senses but an experience that
outside human control—that is, if there is nothing we can possibly do to
fails to fit into the unitary spatio-temporal scheme?” (211). And indeed,
prevent them occurring or change their properties.
it is clear that the simplest way in which an entity can have fixed properties
This result is similar to the growing-block universe view espoused by
is by having a spatiotemporal location. This is the feature shared by all
C. D. Broad, according to which the past and present exist, but the future
concrete entities, including material objects, events, and more borderline
does not because it is continually being generated, with the exception that
phenomena such as rays of light. A number of entities that are neither
certain future objects and events can be said to exist if they are outside
8 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 9
precisely material nor abstract, such as thoughts and experiences, can also way to eliminate metaphor from our theories, and thus Quine’s criterion
be thought of as concrete entities in this context because they have a tem- will always fail to resolve certain existence claims since “the more contro-
poral location even though they lack a spatial one. versial of these claims are equipoised between literal and metaphorical in a
Conversely, abstract objects such as numbers, possible worlds, and way that Quine’s method is powerless to address” (259). But while we can
properties seem to be characterized by a lack of a spatial or temporal loca- agree that existence claims do sometimes have a significant metaphorical
tion. We therefore need to find another source for their apparent mind- element, there are also cases in which they seem entirely straightforward,
independence. In the clearest cases, it seems to come from a realm of and on examination, we find that these cases are generally the spatiotem-
unalterable relations. Numbers, for instance, are mind-independent in poral ones. We can therefore apply the notion of two senses of existence
the sense that the relations between them cannot be changed by human to Yablo and Gallois’s analysis: the literal meaning of existence, based on
thought or action. Similarly, possible worlds are governed by a set of logical spatiotemporal location, is normally uncontroversial because it is a matter
relations which seem to be beyond human influence. This is striking when of empirical fact whether some object or process has a spatiotemporal loca-
we consider the fact that spatiotemporal location is often characterized in tion, but the metaphorical usage is problematic because we cannot observe
terms of spatial and temporal relations between entities. Indeed, the sys- the spaces involved and therefore there can be disputes about their con-
tematic relations between abstract objects are often characterized in terms tent. The issue is further confused by the fact that references to existence are
of “spaces” such as arithmetical space, logical space, or phase space. There ambiguous, so when an object exists in the metaphorical sense but not in
is pleasing symmetry in the proposal that concrete entities exist in virtue of the literal sense, we have difficulty answering questions about existence that
their spatiotemporal location, while abstract entities exist in virtue of their do not specify the sense intended. Thus the proposal that existence has two
location in an abstract space. distinct meanings proves useful in elucidating the well-known intractabil-
It should be evident that abstract spaces are conceptually derivative ity of many existence claims.
from our experience of actual spatiotemporal reality. The very use of the An immediate objection to this view is that by making spatiotemporal
term “space,” which applies first and foremost to actual physical space, indi- location so central we are committing ourselves to the existence of absolute
cates this, as does our practice of laying abstract spaces out in two or three space. But this is not the case. Just as it is relationships that characterize the
dimensions of physical space and applying to them tools initially devel- logical and mathematical spaces in which numbers and logical truths exist,
oped for use in the physical world—for instance, ordinary area and volume so it may be spatiotemporal relationships that characterize the literal space
formulae are frequently used as part of proofs about velocity space. Further- in which concrete things exist and which give substance to existence claims.
more, we experience concrete entities as directly presented in a spatiotem- In fact, it should be immediately obvious that absolute space cannot exist
poral manifold with minimal need for information processing on our part, in the primary sense, because space itself cannot have a location in space.
while the spaces of abstract entities, though their properties may be fixed, It should also be clear that absolute space does exist in the secondary sense,
are conceivable only after what can sometimes be considerable intellec- because it is a paradigmatic example of an abstracted realm governed by
tual effort. Finally, consider the process of human cognitive development: rules analogous to our ordinary experience of space.
we grasp concepts related to actual physical space-time significantly earlier Abstract and concrete entities therefore cannot be thought of as obey-
than we come to grips with analogues such as arithmetical or logical space. ing the same criterion for existence, for although the existence of both is re-
Thus the relations and spaces characterizing abstract objects are themselves lated to mind-independence, in the case of concrete entities it is spatiotem-
more mind-dependent than actual physical space in that they are deliber- poral location which primarily grounds claims to existence, whereas abstract
ately modeled upon our spatiotemporal experiences and therefore occupy entities are grounded by their location in some kind of conceptual space.
a secondary role in our ontology. This secondary criterion is modeled on, but nonetheless distinct from, the
Given that it is these relational spaces which confer existence upon criterion for concrete entities. Therefore the two branching frameworks we
the objects that are related, it seems likely that we are dealing with two have identified are not ultimately united within one universal framework,
senses of existence, the first being literal and the second being almost meta- but remain as two separate networks, each exemplifying a different meaning
phorical. Stephen Yablo and Andre Gallois reach a similar conclusion by of existence. Furthermore, the sense in which concrete entities exist is clearly
considering the application of Quine’s criterion to theories that include primary, while abstract entities exist in a secondary, derivative sense which
irreducibly metaphorical elements. They argue that there is no principled can be viewed as a metaphor for normal spatiotemporal existence.
10 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 11
VI. Van Inwagen’s Objections only within one framework or the other. We know how to think of three
apples plus three apples; three apples plus three pears is not much more
Van Inwagen has two principal objections to the thesis that there are troublesome; and even three apples plus three tables can be visualized with-
two senses of existence. First of all, he claims that existence is strongly tied out difficulty. Similarly, we can understand the meaning of three opinions
to number, and that numbers have the same meaning when applied to ab- plus three opinions, though we start to have more difficulty understanding
stract and to concrete entities, and then he concludes that “the univocacy an operation like three opinions plus three possible worlds. Even the latter,
of number and the intimate connection between number and existence however, is at least comprehensible if we conceptualize it as a total of six
should convince us that there is at least very good reason to think that distinct ideas or thoughts. But we have real trouble if we try to do a sum
existence is univocal” (236). like three apples plus three opinions. We simply do not have the resources
It seems correct to say that existence does play an important part in to make sense of that kind of combination. If there were a univocal sense
the concept of counting. However, it is not clear that numbers do mean of existence grounding a univocal notion of number, we ought to be able
precisely the same thing when applied to abstract and to concrete entities. to appeal to it—but the best we can do here is say that the total is six enti-
There are difficulties arising from the application of numbers to either ties, which is not much more informative than simply saying that three plus
kind of entity, but it is important to notice that the difficulties are quite three equals six. In fact, it seems clear that what we do in this case is simply
different in each case. The application of numbers to concrete things often ignore the objects concerned and carry out a numerical calculation. Thus
presents us with paradoxes of constitution: Peter Unger’s Problem of the in such cases we do not appeal to some univocal understanding of existence
Many, for instance, asks how it is possible to count large macroscopic objects that applies equally to both concrete and abstract objects, we simply ignore
since in the vicinity of any such object there are always indefinitely many the objects altogether and retreat to the mathematical formalism, which
other candidates differing only in the addition or exclusion of a few par- works even when it is being applied to nothing at all.
ticles (411–67). It is much more straightforward to count a set of abstract Van Inwagen’s argument, then, backfires: if it is true that number is
objects such as ideal triangles, since vagueness in constitution is not pos- closely tied to existence, and it is also true that numbers are applied in two
sible and we can therefore easily identify what counts as a single triangle. quite distinct ways to abstract and to concrete objects, it seems likely that
On the other hand, the application of the notion of number to abstract there are two distinct senses of existence for abstract and concrete objects.
things is complicated by ambiguity between particulars and universals: this Of course, van Inwagen could still maintain that there is a single meaning
has led to on-going debate about whether properties should be taken as of existence which simply works differently when applied to two different
particulars known as tropes or as universals inhering in every one of their kinds of objects, but this is still rather different from the univocal concep-
instances. Concrete entities, on the other hand, do not face this problem tion of existence that he initially argues for.
as they can be particularized by spatial location. Van Inwagen’s second argument concerns the use of the existential
The fact that quite different paradoxes arise from the application of quantifier. The existential quantifier, he observes, has exactly the same
number to concrete and to abstract entities is significant because the para- truth conditions when applied to abstract objects as to concrete objects,
doxes seem to arise from the meaning of number. This gives us cause to and since the existential quantifier signifies existence, it follows that ab-
think that perhaps numbers do not have exactly the same meaning when stract objects and concrete objects are subject to exactly the same notion
applied to the two kinds of entities. Of course, van Inwagen could argue of existence.
that the different paradoxes arise not from a difference in the meaning of As a first reply to this argument, we should observe that it is not
the numbers but from the different ways in which we apply one and the entirely obvious that the existential quantifier signifies existence, since its
same meaning to different sorts of entities. However, this view seems less truth conditions can be given without any consideration of whether the
plausible if we consider the difficulties involved in using numbers to de- objects in the domain of quantification actually exist. Van Inwagen takes
scribe both abstract and concrete objects in the same context. If there were note of this and comments that “the meaning of the quantifiers is given
a single meaning of numbers deriving from a single meaning of existence by the phrases of English—or of some other natural language—that they
for both abstract and concrete entities, we would presumably be able to un- abbreviate,” and since the relevant sentences are clearly about existence, so
derstand arithmetical operations combining abstract and concrete entities is the quantifier (240). But this approach undermines his initial argument.
with relative ease. But in fact, arithmetical operations seem to be applicable For if the meaning of the quantifiers is not given by their truth conditions
12 Emily AdlAm ThE duAliTy of ExisTEncE 13
but by the sentences they abbreviate, then the identical truth conditions for VII. Conclusions
abstract and concrete objects do not imply that the quantifier has the same
meaning for abstract and concrete objects. To ascertain this we would have A consideration of Carnap’s frameworks for ontological discourse
to consult the English sentences being abbreviated to see if the meaning leads us to observe that there are two distinct structures within which enti-
of “existence” is the same in sentences concerning abstract objects as in ties may exist. This suggests that there can be a single meaning for existence
concrete ones—but this is precisely the point at issue. only if we have a single criterion which unites the two structures. However,
Furthermore, the fact that the existential quantifier needs to be used although the existence conditions for both branches are related to mind-
with a domain of quantification reflects features of the English language, independence, mind-independence is very different in each branch: for
for as Carnap points out, existence claims in ordinary language come with concrete entities it is provided primarily by spatiotemporal location, while
a presupposition that we are working within some particular framework. for abstract entities it draws upon a derivative concept of “location” in a
The framework, together with its rules, provides a domain of quantifica- relational space. We are therefore drawn to the view that there are two dis-
tion, so when we say “X exists” or “there is an X,” our statements are true tinct senses of identity, one literal and a second more metaphorical. This
in virtue of the presence of X in the set of objects stipulated to exist by approach not only explains linguistic features of existence attributions, but
the rules of the framework. Superficially, this might suggest that existence also provides strategies for dealing with ontological disputes over problematic
claims do indeed have the same meaning whether we refer to abstract or entities like absolute space or future events.
to concrete entities, because no matter what the claim concerns, we can
ascertain its truth simply by consulting the rules of the framework within
which we work. But there will still be different meanings if the frameworks
make use of very different rules. Since, as we have seen, the frameworks can
be separated into two distinct sets, and since these distinct sets make use
of very different rules, it seems that “existence” has two distinct meanings
despite having the same truth conditions in all cases.
To support this analysis, we should note that it is not unprecedented
for the same logical symbol to formalize widely varying concepts. The iden-
tity symbol is a good example. The identity relation does have the same for-
mal characteristics wherever it is used (it is transitive, reflexive and symmet-
ric) but usages differ significantly in other ways. Since Hume it has been
recognized that identity is relative to sortal term: we have very different
identity conditions for lumps of matter, biological systems, and persons.
Even more striking is the distinction between synchronous identity (identi-
ty at one point in time) and diachronic identity (identity across time). This
distinction is so significant that what may be taken as one of the definitive
axioms of synchronous identity, Leibniz’s Principle of the Indiscernibility
of Identicals (X and Y have all their properties in common if they are iden-
tical) does not apply to diachronic identity, or at least not without signifi-
cant revision of our concept of property possession, since on the face of it
the same object can possess different properties at different times. Thus it
is clear that logical symbols can capture only the formal characteristics of
a property or relation, which do not provide an exhaustive description of
concepts like identity or existence. It is therefore unproblematic to suggest
that two quite different concepts of existence could be formalized by the
same symbol.
Works Cited
Alexander, H. G., ed. The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence. Manchester:
Manchester UP, 1956.
Broad, C. D. Scientific Thought. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1923.
Carnap, Rudolf. Meaning and Necessity. Chicago: Chicago UP, 1947.
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford:
Oxford UP, 1978.
Plato. Cratylus. Trans. Benjamin Jowett. The Dialogues of Plato, Volume 1.
Ed. Benjamin Jowett. New York: C. Scribner’s Sons, 1871.
Putnam, Hilary. “Brains in a Vat.” Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge UP, 1981. 1–21.
Quine, W. V. O. “Designation and Existence.” The Journal of Philosophy
36.26 (1939): 701–9.
Quinton, Anthony. “Spaces and Times.” The Philosophy of Time. Ed. Robin
Le Poidevin and Murray MacBeath. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1993. 203–20.
Unger, Peter. “The Problem of the Many.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5
(1980): 411–67.
van Inwagen, Peter. “Meta-Ontology.” Erkenntnis 48 (1998): 233–50.
Yablo, Stephen and Andre Gallois. “Does Ontology Rest on a Mistake?”
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 72 (1998): 229–61.