Aporia vol. 21 no. 1—2011
Many Relations and the
Problem of Material Constitution
Anthony AdriAn
In A Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person, Hud Hudson pro-
poses a novel solution to the problem of the many on behalf of three-
dimensionalists.1 He rejects this new solution, called the 3d Partist
View, on the way to his preferred four-dimensionalist version of it. The
3d Partist View is admirable in its originality and its ability to handle cer-
tain puzzles of material constitution. However, it is still missing something.
The purpose of this paper is to offer a hylomorphist interpretation of 3d
Partism. As such, this paper will not be a critique of Hudson’s preferred
4d Partism. Rather, I will show one of the overlooked virtues of hylomor-
phism, viz. its ability to solve problems of material constitution. In section
1 I will briefly review the problem of the many, in section 2 I will explain
Hudson’s 3d Partist View and why he rejects it, in section 3 I will introduce
my hylomorphist version of the Partist View, and in section 4 I will show
how this addition can solve the problem of the many. Finally, in section
5, I will tally up some metaphysical commitments of both my version and
Hudson’s version of the Partist View.
Before we get into the problem of the many and the Partist View, I need
to make clear an important assumption about material constitution that
I make throughout the paper. The problem of material constitution arises
1 In this paper, “three-dimensionalism” will refer to the thesis that material objects have extension
in only three dimensions and persist over time by enduring; that is to say, objects persist over time
by being “wholly present” at each time they exist. Opposed to this is “four-dimensionalism,” the
thesis that objects have temporal parts in addition to their material parts and persist over time by
perduring; that is to say, objects persist over time in virtue of having temporal parts whenever they
exist.
Anthony Adrian is a senior philosophy major at Texas State University. His interests
include metaphysics, the philosophy of logic, and ancient and medieval philosophy.
62 Anthony AdriAn
when there seem to be two (or more) objects composed of the very same
matter (at the same time and at the same place) and when those objects seem
to be related to the shared matter in different ways. There are several tradi-
tional philosophical puzzles related to the problem of material constitution,
including the problem of the many (to be discussed below), the problem of
the statue and the clay, the paradox of the Ship of Theseus, and the paradox
of increase. The assumption I will be making is that these related problems
are actually just imperfect statements of the problem of material constitu-
tion, as Michael Rea has shown, and that any solution to the problem of
material constitution is a solution to the related problems, but not neces-
sarily vice versa (“Problem” 525). The reader will thus notice that I treat the
problem of the many and the puzzle of the statue and the clay as more or less
equivalent and that I frequently move back and forth between them.
I. The Problem of the Many
The following is Hudson’s condensed presentation of the problem
of the many:2
1. Legion, a human person, is sitting in his chair.
2. The set of simples Tweedledee is exactly the set
that composes Legion.
3. Tweedledum is the set of simples that has as its
elements all the members of Tweedledee except for
one simple. (15–17)
The problem of the many becomes apparent when there appears to
be at most one composite object (in this case, a human person) but there
are also many other composite objects located “within” that object that
seem to qualify as the very same kind of object. In this case, the question
arises, is Tweedledum a person? We know that Tweedledum, if he (or it)
is not a person, has almost exactly what it takes to be a person. According
to Hudson, each mereologically simple object seems to be insignificant on
its own, and therefore it also seems that no one simple can make the dif-
ference between a person and a non-person. And if one simple should not
make a difference, it seems that two simples should not make a difference
either. But if we start subtracting simples one by one, we are left with a
whole host of person candidate sets.
2 I’ve used the condensed version of the argument because Hudson’s original formulation depends
on his commitment to mereological universalism (the thesis that for any plurality of objects what-
soever, there is necessarily an object composed of them). He then revises the problem to appeal
to those who aren’t universalists. However, because the particulars of mereological universalism
aren’t essential to my argument, I will use only the condensed version.
MAny relAtions 63
II. The Partist View
Hudson then examines ten solutions to the problem of the many.
He deems the “constitution view” one of the more plausible solutions, but
ultimately rejects it. In describing the constitution view, he says,
Let us acknowledge that there is a multitude of things in
Legion’s chair at T but then claim that they are person-
constituters rather than persons . . . This position, char-
acterized by the slogan “constitution is not identity,” per-
mits us to say that there is exactly one person in Legion’s
chair at T, and that there are many person-constituters
there also.3 (Hudson 32)
But Hudson is a mereological universalist who thinks that constitution
just is identity (33). Additionally, Hudson observes that the many person
constituters (of which Tweedledum is one) are just too similar to the per-
son Legion not to be persons themselves. To support this claim, Hudson
approvingly quotes David Lewis’s discussion of cat-constituters (as opposed
to the person-constituters we have been discussing):
The constituters are cat-like in size, shape, weight, inner
structure, and motion . . . any way a cat can be at a mo-
ment, cat-constituters also can be; anything a cat can do
at a moment, cat-constituters also can do. They are all
too cat-like not to be cats. (33)
Hudson notes that three-dimensionalists typically view parthood as a three
place relation which is indexed to a time: p is a part of object a at time T.
The three-dimensionalist needs this relativizing to a time to account for the
fact that some objects (paradigmatically, organisms) are composed of differ-
ent parts at different times. When asked whether the set of x’s or the set
of y’s compose the object o, the three-dimensionalist may insist that the ques-
tion is ill formed. We cannot make sense of composition simpliciter since
an object may have different parts at different times.4
Hudson then suggests that the three-dimensionalist take parthood to
be a four place relation, where r is a variable that indexes the parthood rela-
tion to a region of space: p is a part of a at region R at time T. The question
of parthood is now relativized both to a time and to a region of space.
Though it is intuitively clear why a three-dimensionalist would relativize
3 I realize that when using the word “constitution,” most philosophers have in mind objects that
completely share their parts, but since I’m focusing on Hudson’s presentation of the problems, I’ll
stick to his usage of the term.
4 This does not apply only to organisms. Many inanimate objects, such as houses and universities,
gain and lose parts over time.
64 Anthony AdriAn
parthood to a time, is there any motivation for relativizing parthood to a
region of space?
Consider the following case of an object that has seemingly contra-
dictory properties if not for the relativity of regions of space. Imagine a
perfectly homogeneous sphere that occupies a continuous region of space.
Let us also say that the sphere has no proper parts; the sphere is mereo-
logically simple.5 Now imagine that the sphere is colored green on its left
half and colored red on its right half. Given that the sphere has no proper
parts, when asked what color it is, we might be at a loss trying to explain
that the sphere is bicolored yet mereologically simple. It seems as though
we must say that the sphere is both green and red (but not a mixture of the
colors). But this sort of scenario should not make us break a sweat as long
as we can specify a certain region where it is true that the sphere is red and
another region where it is true that the sphere is green. Since we have at
least one instance that motivates us to stipulate a region when asking about
composition, I’ll take it to be permissible to invoke regions when giving a
formula for parthood.
When we ask whether the set Tweedledum composes a person, we
must refer to the set Tweedledum at a certain time and place. The three-
dimensionalist may say that one object can exactly occupy multiple regions
at one time and that an object may have different properties at different
regions. There is not an object x at R and another object y at R* which have
different properties and yet are still identical. Rather, the single object x has
a certain property at R and another property at R* (a subregion, perhaps),
but it is nevertheless x at every region. The four place Partist View of part-
hood allows the three-dimensionalist to escape the problem of the many by
claiming identity among all of the “persons” at differing regions of space.
So while the problem of the many may show that there is an enormous
number of persons sitting in the chair “with” Legion, they are nevertheless
all identical to Legion at the same time, t, but each is identical to Legion
at a different region.
It seems as though three-dimensionalism is rescued from one sticky
problem, but there are other embarrassing puzzles for the 3d Partist to wor-
ry about. Hudson brings in the infamous cat Tibbles to illustrate one such
problem.
Tibbles is composed of a set of simples, the x’s, at region R at time T .
1
Tibs is the set of simples, the y’s, which compose all of Tibbles minus her
tail, at R* at T . The 3d Partist claims the following:
1
Tibs @R* @T = Tibbles @R @T
1 1
5 This assumes the thesis that simple objects can be extended. Though I favor an analysis of simples
as extended, I don’t wish to defend that thesis here. My usage of extended simples is merely for the
sake of the example. For more on extended simples, see Simons.
MAny relAtions 65
From left to right, this reads: Tibs at subregion R* at time T is identical to
1
Tibbles at region R at time T . The problem is that at R at T , Tibbles
1 1
has Tibs as a proper part. For a thing x to be a proper part of a thing y is
for x to be a part of y and for y not to be a part of x.6 Although an object
can be an improper part of itself, no object can be a proper part of itself. But
if we claim that Tibs is identical to Tibbles, even by granting the 3d Partist
that identity can hold between objects at different regions at the same time,
we are committed to saying just that. Assuming that we want to keep the
traditional notion of proper part (which is virtually non-negotiable), this
contradiction is fatal to the 3d Partist View. To see that it is fatal, note that
improper parthood implies identity (if x is an improper part of y, then x is
identical to y) while proper parthood implies non-identity. 3d Partism eras-
es the distinction between proper and improper parthood, and claims that
a whole thing can be identical to one (or more) of its proper parts.
III. Another Relation
What is a three-dimensionalist to do? One thing three-dimensionalists
should certainly not do is simply abandon Hudson’s insights on index-
ing parthood to a region of space—it is too valuable of a distinction to
throw away. However, the three-dimensionalist also shouldn’t buy into this
business of things being identical at different regions, nor should she im-
mediately grant Hudson’s rejection of constitution. For Hudson, the prob-
lem with constitution is that there is too much of a similarity between the
constituters (in these cases, Tweedledum and Tibs) and what is constituted
(Tweedledee and Tibbles, respectively). The difference between having and
lacking a single mereological simple is plainly insufficient to distinguish
between a person, Tweedledee, and a non-person, Tweedledum. The dif-
ference is difficult to distinguish if we take the only “difference maker” to
be mereological simple objects. Luckily, mereological simples do not have
a monopoly on difference making. I suggest that the three-dimensionalist
add another relation: the in-F relation where F stands for a certain form.
Form has been invoked throughout philosophy’s history. A form could be
understood as a Platonic universal, an Aristotelian function that is imma-
nent within the object, or some divine designation. This five-place consti-
tution relation will be compatible with most, if not all, realist conceptions
of form. When I speak of form, I have in mind the Aristotelian, non-
transcendental version, though nothing that follows depends on my prefer-
ence for one over the others. The new parthood formula will look like this:
x @W < y/F @R
6 Formally, ∀(x) ∀(y) (PPxy ↔ (Pxy ∙ ∼Pyx)).
66 Anthony AdriAn
This formula reads: x at region W is a part of y in the form F at region
R. For the sake of simplicity, I will not refer to periods of time separately
from regions of space (or vice versa). So any talk of region will be of space-
time region.
The five-place relation, as one might guess, is basically hylomor-
phism combined with Hudson’s Partist theory; I shall call it Hylomorphic
Partism. Hylomorphism fits naturally with many of our intuitions about
material objects. For instance, the distinction between an assembled table
and the disassembled parts of the table is best expressed in hylomorphic
terminology: an assembled table and the disassembled parts of the table
both have the same matter but they have different forms. Distinguishing be-
tween the form of an object and the matter of an object is often overlooked
in contemporary philosophy as a strategy for solving puzzles of material
constitution.
But what, some may wonder, is form? This is a difficult question to
give an exact response to, but the following examples should give us at least
as clear of a concept of form as traditional examples give us of the concept
of a mereological sum. Form can be said to be the principle of unity of a
thing. When we see a shiny new gadget, one whose function we cannot
readily discern, we ask questions like “What is it?” and “What does it do?”
These questions about what a thing is and what a thing does, as opposed
to what the thing is made of, are questions concerning the form of a thing.
Typically, the form of a thing is a functional explanation of it. The form, or
principle of unity, of a composite object may therefore follow this schema:
What it is for (a table/a gun/an organism/etc.) to ex-
ist is for these parts (a table/a gun/an organism/etc.)
to (the principle of unity is specified here).7
The requisite form will differ between objects of different kinds. For
instance, the principle of unity necessary for an organism to sustain exis-
tence will be a dynamic principle, because the parts of an organism are ac-
tively contributing to the metabolic processes. In the case of an artifact, the
principle of unity could be less active, but it must still allow for the intend-
ed function of the artifact. Of course, not all artifacts have a function. A
clay statue does not have a form that allows for a function. Rather, the form
of a statue is simply the arrangement of the clay parts that yields the in-
tended aesthetic qualities.
This form of a thing explains under what conditions that object ex-
ists and how it is to persist. Consider the parts of a firearm lying on a
table. Is there are an object composed of the unassembled, disjointed parts?
Mereological universalism says yes, but this appears to be a case of the tail
7 This is based on a schema found in Johnston (133).
MAny relAtions 67
wagging the dog. The problem most people have with conceding that there
is an object composed of the disassembled parts is that there simply does
not appear to be any compelling reason to do so. Nothing about pieces of
a gun lying within close proximity to each other forces us to say that there
is a single object there.
But when we consider an assembled firearm, at least one reason to
posit a new object emerges. There is at least one thing an assembled gun
can do that its parts cannot: propel a bullet. And that function depends on
the arrangement of the parts of the gun (just try getting the disassembled,
or even partly assembled, parts of a gun to fire a bullet). Since we have a
case in which the arrangement (form) of certain matter (the parts of the
gun) yields a new functional capacity (bullet propelling) we have good rea-
son to suppose that when you assemble the parts of a gun in the right way
you will get a new composite object. And there just does not seem to be
that same compelling reason when we are considering whether mereologi-
cal sums exist. Note that in this case, there seems to both a functional and
aesthetic principle of unity at work. Consider a highly ornate gun that has
been stolen from a museum. If the thief were to assemble its parts in such
a way that it could fire a bullet but lacked the ornamentation and design
of the original, and then he were to return that object, the museum cura-
tor may still insist that the gun hadn’t yet been returned. In this case, there
seem to be two forms that are independently necessary and jointly suffi-
cient to constitute the gun.
IV. Hylomorphic Partism and the Problem of the Many
I will discuss Hudson’s arguments against the 3d Partist only with
respect to inanimate objects, and specifically with respect to artifacts.8 The
question whether Tweedledum is a person actually comprises two dis-
tinct questions: 1) Do the simples belonging to the set Tweedledum com-
pose an object? And 2) Supposing that the set of simples does compose an
object, does that object meet the philosophical requirements of person-
hood? Since we are dealing with the part-whole relationship, only the first
question concerns us.
Let us consider another prominent example illustrating the problem
of material constitution: the paradox of the statue and the clay. A sculptor
buys himself a fine slab of clay at T . In the interval between T and T we
0 0 1
find the sculptor doing what he does best—sculpting. At T our protago-
1
nist has finished his masterpiece. Shortly after T the sculptor presents his
1
statue to an audience, who marvels at its beauty.
8 As opposed to inanimate natural bodies such as mountains.
68 Anthony AdriAn
“The clay,” some patrons remark, “is exquisite. Where did you im-
port it from?” As the sculptor prepares to respond, his arch nemesis, having
snuck into the private audience, smashes the statue into hundreds of pieces
at T . Constitutionalists will claim that the sculptor brought a new object—
2
the statue—into existence and that it was later destroyed. The statue was an
object that was constituted by, but not identical to, a certain hunk of clay.
Moreover, the clay existed from T to T (and perhaps beyond, in scattered
0 2
form) whereas the statue existed only from T to T . Let us return to the
1 2
schema introduced earlier: what it is for a statue to exist is for some matter
to be formed in some aesthetic manner at a certain region and time and
not to be an immediate part of a larger statue. Requiring that the statue not
be the immediate part of a larger statue will also help us when, say, part
of the statue gets broken off. When we are left with a partly fragmented
statue we would still say that it is the same statue as it was prior to losing
some parts. This is because the form has stayed the same. Of course, there
will be a point where the statue has lost its form and the clay will no longer
constitute a statue. But, this is a matter of epistemic, and not ontological,
vagueness.9
Recall that Hudson’s charge is that there is not a significant differ-
ence between an object and its numerous object constituters. A statue
constituter that lacks one simple that the actual statue possesses does not
seem to be different in any important way, but if we take the in-F relation
seriously, there is a significant difference: one set of simples in a particular
region is in the statue form while the other sets of matter in the subregions
are not.
Of course, Hudson will want to know why one set of simples, presum-
ably the largest set under consideration, S, is in the form of a statue, yet a
set lacking one member of S (we will call that set S*), is not in the form of
a statue. Let us begin by assuming there is a statue at region R. We may say
that subset S* at subregion R* is potentially a statue because that subset
at that subregion has the accidental form of a statue in virtue of being a part
of a set at a region that actually is a statue. The subset has a certain con-
figuration that is nearly indistinguishable from the actual statue, but that
configuration is due to the fact that it is configuring a larger object. And if
that set has a certain form due to another set having the same form, then it
is in the constitution relation.
One may worry that the addition of the in-F relation appears to be
unnecessary since it is not doing any work that the region relativization
cannot do. If something is occupying a certain region, then that object is in
9 Hudson and I are in agreement about the impossibility of ontological vagueness. See Hudson
72–80 for further discussion.
MAny relAtions 69
a certain configuration; after all, regions are not shapeless. The addition of
yet another relation seems superfluous.
It is important to notice that objects “occupy” regions by being “in”
certain forms. And, as we noted earlier, the form, but not the region an
object occupies, will dictate the persistence conditions of that kind of ob-
ject. To see this, and to return to talk of guns, imagine that we have a mold
of a gun. At one time, metal is poured into the mold and produces an
object with the capacity to fire a bullet.10 Certain other types of metal may
be suitable substitutes to pour in the mold and make an object that can
fire a bullet, but there will be certain materials (clay, perhaps) that could
be poured into the mold and thus occupy the same region without being
able to function as a gun. This drives home the point that when it comes
to objects that have a functional purpose, the form of an object is not to
be identified simply with the spatial arrangement without reference to the
kind of matter.
What I have said about forms may bear a striking resemblance to an-
other solution to constitution puzzles—the invocation of maximal proper-
ties. Ted Sider has said that “a property, F, is maximal, roughly, if large parts
of an F are not themselves Fs” (139). The idea is that an object at region R
has the property of, say, being a table just in case none of the larger objects
composing it (the legs of table, the top of the table, etc.) have the property of
being a table. This is supposed to explain the difference between a table and
the ever so slightly smaller object that is the table minus one simple.
The problem with maximal properties is that they do not really ex-
plain anything; rather, they point to an instance of two objects which are
nearly identical yet which have different properties. But it is not clear why
one object has a maximal property and another object lacks it. The pres-
ence or absence of a maximal property, however, is highly informative.
What we discover from apparent maximal properties is the presence of a
certain form that would allow for that property to be manifested. We could
then explain why an object has a maximal property based on its arrange-
ment and functional unity.
Another possible objection deals with the difference between form
and matter. We have said that at region R there is a statue, but is there
not also a lump of clay occupying the entirety of region R? Indeed, at every
region where there is a part of the statue there will also be clay since the
statue is made of clay. So it will not do us much good to say that the form
of clayness has suddenly disappeared when the matter that formerly com-
posed clay is now in the form of a statue.
10 Let us assume for the sake of an argument that a gun could be made by such a process.
70 Anthony AdriAn
As I see it, there are two answers one could give in this situation, the
second of which is my preferred explanation. The first is to make the form
that the hylomorphic compound is in hyperspecific. So instead of say-
ing that the clay is in the form of a statue, one could say that the clay is in
the form of a clay-statue. Since the matter is in the form of a clay-statue,
this explains why we seem to refer to the clay even though the hylomorphic
compound is a statue. Were some matter to be in the form of a gold-statue,
we should expect people to remark about the sheen and the quality of the
gold. But suppose we have a golden statue of David next to a clay statue
of David. Do we observe the same form in both statues? The arrangement
certainly seems the same in both statues; the only difference is that one is
made of a precious metal and the other is not.
Alternatively, one could say that the clay is now playing the role of the
matter in the form-matter compound that is the statue. The fact that we
can refer to the clay without referring to the statue, on this account, would
be perfectly natural, since to talk about the clay is just to talk about the hylo-
morphic compound’s matter without referring to its form. We do this sort
of thing all the time; while observing a wooden table, one may note the out-
standing quality of the wood used but ultimately have a negative opinion
of the table itself. Referring to the matter (or the thing that is playing the
role of matter) of the object currently in a certain form is ubiquitous.
This allows one to say that there are actually two hylomorphic com-
pounds—the clay and the statue. In this case, one hylomorphic compound
acts as the matter in a further form-matter compound. That is to say, any
composite object will have certain constituents with a certain principle of
unity, in this case, the clay is a constituent of the statue, and those con-
stituents may also have their own constituents with their own principles of
unity. It is taken by many to be a conceptual truth that two distinct material
objects cannot occupy one and the same region. But it is not at all appar-
ent that two (or more) hylomorphic compounds cannot occupy the same
region of space.11
Say that I fashioned a bit of clay into a cross, which would mean
something very profound to a Christian. Presenting it to a Christian would
mean something completely different than presenting it to a primitive trib-
al community. Perhaps the tribal people have no conception of a cross and
therefore have no reason to recognize the form of a cross. When presented
with the cross, all they see is a piece of clay in an unfamiliar formation. We
should also leave open the possibility that when we observe ordinary material
11 Rea, in “Sameness without Identity,” and Brower and Rea, in “Material Constitution and the
Trinity,” take up the task of explaining how two hylomorphic compounds which lack identity
could ultimately be the same material object.
MAny relAtions 71
objects, we might be in a position like that of a tribe. Perhaps, when observ-
ing a cross, some extraterrestrial community sees clay, a cross, and some
other object that we don’t recognize, despite the form having “been there”
anytime we observed the object. This is not to make the relativistic claim
that we project forms onto certain collections of matter. Rather, it is to say that
we simply might be ignorant of certain kinds of things. With that in mind,
I think the safest thing to say is that there are at least two hylomorphic
compounds in the case of the statue constituted by clay. Note too that this
is not at all at odds with the previous answer. To say that the clay is playing
the role of matter in the cross compound is perfectly compatible with the
cross itself being the “matter” in yet another hylomorphic compound.
What I hope is clear now is that there is an alternative to the prob-
lematic 3d Partist View and that we do not have to abandon the idea that
objects endure over time. Nor do we have to accept problematic theories
such as the idea that many things are identical at different regions. The
alternative I have proposed, Hylomorphic Partism, resolves many of the
traditional problems of constitution and is greatly in concert with our ev-
eryday beliefs about material objects.12
12 Special thanks to Charlie Tanksley for valuable discussions on earlier versions of this paper.
Works Cited
Brower, Jeffrey E. and Michael Rea. “Material Constitution and the
Trinity.” Faith and Philosophy 22 (2005): 487–505.
Hudson, Hud. A Materialist Metaphysics of the Human Person. New York:
Cornell UP, 2001.
Johnston, Mark. “Parts and Principles: False Axioms in Mereology.”
Philosophical Topics 30.1 (2002): 129–66.
Rea, Michael. “The Problem of Material Constitution.” Philosophical
Review 104.4 (1995): 525–52.
————. “Sameness without Identity: An Aristotelian Solution to the
Problem of Material Constitution.” Ratio (1998): 316–28.
Sider, Ted. “Maximality and Microphysical Supervenience.” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 66 (2003): 139–49.
Simons, Peter. “Extended Simples: A Third Way Between Atoms and
Gunk.” Monist 87.3 (2004): 371–84.