Aporia, Vol.11, No. 1, 1992
The Virtue of Socratic Dialectic
Nathan Andersen
I. INTRODUCnON
In the Meno, Socrates asserts," I would contend at all costs both in word and
deed as far as I could that we will be better men, braver and less idle, if we
believe that one must search for the things one does not know, rather than if
we believe that it is not possible to find out what we do not know and that we
must not look for it" (86b-c). In light of Socrates' repeated professions of his
own ignorance, this is an interesting claim. It would seem that if Socrates truly
has no knowledge of the good, he would have no basis from which to contend
that any given course of action will make one better. As Socrates' own life
demonstrates, the coiu^se of action which he takes in order to "search for the
things [he] does not know" is that of continually engaging others in dialectic. In
this essay I will examine this claim, which 1 take to be the one which Socrates
advances in the Meno: the pursuit of virtue (through dialectic) has as its effect
the betterment of the pursuer. I will show that this claim is not merely wishful
thinking on the part of Socrates, but that dialectic—inasmuch as it is good
dialectic—is itself & virtuous activity and thus results in the improvement of its
practitioners.
In order to study this claim, I will first examine Socrates' method of di
alectic. I will show what distinguishes Socratic dialogue from the pseudo-dialec
tical maneuvers of the Sophists. Specifically, I will point out what distinguishes
good dialectic from bad diiectic.
An integral part of Socrates' method of dialectic is the demand for strict
definitions. Despite this demand, most of the Socratic dialogues end with the in
terlocutor finding himself in a state of aporia, and Socrates himself admits to no
knowledge. It would appear that satisfactory definitions of the sort which
Socrates demands cannot be found. I will attempt to discover why it is that
Socrates must demand strict definitions, and what it is that dialectic accom
plishes if it is not the production of final definitions.
LasUy, having examined the method of dialectic, I will briefly explore
the nature of virtue. Virtue, I will show, is not simply some ideal quality which
one can "possess." Virtue can never be separat^ from "virtuous activity."
Virtuous activity effects a movement—a movement which serves to better the
virtuous one and offers a possibility of improvement for those whom the virtu
ous one engages. Such an activity can be found in the searching process in
which Socrates engages through diaJectic.
II. DIALECTIC
In the Phaedo, Socrates specifically points out that his investigations of
the "truth of things" and his search for the good are accomplished by "means of
words"( 99d-l(X)a). We find in the Alcibiades I an argument as to why this is so.
16 Nathan Andersen
What Socrates wishes to show by his argument is that in order to make oneself
better one must know oneself, and that this can only be accomplished through
discourse with another person.
Socrates begins his argument by raising a genuine coneem. Both he and
Alcibiades agree that they are ignorant in matters ofj ustice, and that they need to
"take pains over themselves" (127d-128a). In order to be certain about taking
pains over themselves, however, they need to be sure what it is precisely that
they mean by "themselves." Indeed, this is no simple matter. As Socrates points
out, it was no "mere scamp" who wrote the words "know thyself' on the temple
at Delphi (129a).
Socrates determines through his interrogation of Alcibiades that what
one refers to when one speaks of the self must be the soul. After all, in using
words to direct himself toward Alcibiades, Socrates does not speak with
Alcibiades' face, but with Alcibiades himself—"that is, with his soul" (130e,
my emphasis). It is the soul then, and not the body or its ornaments, that they
must concern themselves with.
Having decided what it is they must take pains over, they must deter
mine the means of accomplishing this. Socrates uses here an intriguing analogy.
The eye, in order to see itself, may look into another eye and see its reflection
"at that region of the eye in which the virtue of the eye is found to occur," i.e.
the pupil (133b). In like manner, the soul, in order to know itself, must "surely
look at a soul, and especially at that region of it in which occurs the virtue of a
soul—wisdom"( 133b). For Socrates, this "intercourse of soul with soul" can be
accompUshed by two souls "conversing with each other, while [they] make use
of words"( 130d). The method, then, by which a soul might look at another soul
is by means of words (logoi), through dialectic.' Thus it is through dialectical
interaction that Socrates and Alcibiades can begin to "take pains over" them
selves.
In his book on Plato's metaphysics, Henry Teloh examines two com
plementary activities which distinguish Socratic diiectic: elenchus and psycha-
gogia (61). Elenchus is an essentially negative technique which involves the
refutation and destruction of dogmatically held opinions, yet its effects are posi
tive in that by revealing the flawed understandings of the interlocutor, it makes
possible the search for new understanding. Psychagogia, which literally means
"to lead or guide the soul," is positively directed toward the "drawing out of true
beliefs by argument, suggestion, innuendo, and informal paradox"( Teloh 61).
In order for negative dialectic, or elenchus, to be effective, the dialecti-
eian must first attempt to induce the interlocutor to reveal his core beliefs. As
Nicias explains in the Laches, whoever enters into conversation with Socrates
"will be continually carried round and round by him, until at last he finds that he
has to give an account both of his present and past life; and when he is once en
tangled, Socrates will not let him go until he has completely and thoroughly
'I n order to justify the use of dialectic, Socrates must use dialectic. He must ask ques
tions, refute assumptions, and risk assertions and analogies in order to attain agree
ment. This may shed some interesting hght on the nature of Socratic dialectic. Its jus
tification is not established by means of proofs, but in the effective motion of the
conversation which takes place. Later I will examine this movement both in terms of
its motion and in terms of its effects.
Socratic Dialectic 17
sifted him"( 187e-188a). When the interlocutor has given account of his beliefs,
the dialectician can proceed to show by counter-example ways in which these be
liefs are flawed. It is essential for the success of this method that the interlocutor
be the one to commit himself to a given position or belief so that when this po
sition is shown to be flawed he will fully recognize his own ignorance. This
recognition of ignorance is necessary to place the interlocutor in a position from
which he might be willing to learn.
Psychagogia, rather than trying to refute false beliefs, attempts to guide
the interlocutor toward true beliefs. Henry Teloh points out that the object of
psychagogia is not simply to "teach by telling" but "to engage the autonomous
resources of the answerer," so that what is learned is not simply a set of words to
be recited, but is actively understood (63-4).
In the Alcibiades I we find Socrates engaged in both elenchus and psy
chagogia. Socrates shows Alcibiades through elenchus that he (Alcibiades) is ut
terly unable to give adequate counsel in matters ofj ustice. Socrates then proceeds
to guide Alcibiades (through psychagogia) toward an understanding of what he
must do in order to improve his moral condition. He can no longer remain en
tirely independent, but must devote himself to a friendship with Socrates in
which they will both become more aware of their own moral conditions by con
tinually engaging in discourse. The effectiveness of the dialogue is evidenced by
the change it brings about in Alcibiades. Whereas, prior to the dialogue,
Alcibiades claimed to "have no need of any man in any matter"( 104a), he pro
claims to Socrates near the end of their conversation that "from this day onward
it must be the case that I am your attendant, and you have me always in atten
dance on you"( I35d). Note here that the effects of psychagogia are not the pro
duction of some cognitive knowledge within Alcibiades, but rather the commit
ment to a specific activity: friendly dialectic. I will discuss this notion of friend
ship later, as it appears to mark an essential distinction between Socratic and so
phistic dialectic.
One other specific characteristic of Socrates' dialectic can be seen, as
noted previously, in his demand for strict definitions. In the Euthyphro, Socrates
chastises Euthyphro for giving a specific example of piety (i.e. his own action
in prosecuting his father) in response to Socrates' more general question," What
is piety?" Socrates says," Bear in mind then that I did not bid you tell me one or
two of the many pious actions but lhatf orm itself that makes all pious actions
pious" (6d; my emphasis). Socrates does not want to focus the discussion on pi
ous things but on defining piety itself. In general, Socratic dialectic claims to be
concerned not with specific instances, but with the nature of a thing which
makes itself manifest in all its different instances.
Why is it that Socrates consistently demands strict definitions when
this demand is never met?^ It seems that the demand for strict definitions is not a
^ Nicholas P. White, in his book Plato on Knowledge and Reality, points out that in
his quest for definitions, "one of Plato's aims is to determine the extensions of gen
eral terms" (13). He compares Plato's quest to the familiar experience of being con
fronted with an unknown or unfamiliar word. We repair to a dictionary, or to another
speaker of the language "and are given some expression or string of expressions that
[we] imderstand ... and that purperts to provide an explanation ... of the word or
18 Nathan A ndersen
demand imposed by Socrates, but by the very nature of logos. Logoi, or words,
demand specificity. In order to function (i.e. be understandable by someone other
than the speaker), a given word must be hmited in extension. If a wwd can mean
anything then in a real sense it has no meaning. There must be boundaries. In
his demand for definitions, Socrates attempts to describe these boundaries.
Another point we can make about words is that though they must have limits in
order to function, they always seem to escape these limits. This aspect of words
distresses Euthyphro. He complains," Whatever proposition we put fwward goes
aroimd and refuses to stay put where we establish it" (lib). Euthyphro wishes
that his wOTds would always express that which he intends to communicate, but
in the movement of dialectic, words shp out of their original context, and, there
fore, their original meaning.
This trick of words, which Socrates compares to the magic of Daedelus
in bringing inanimate objects to life (1 Ic-e), can occur precisely because of
Socrates' insistence on definitions. He refuses to examine statements solely on
the basis of what the speaker "means" but insists on examining the limits of
meaning outside of this original intention. These limits on words expand or con
tract depending on the context created by the movement of the dialectic. For ex
ample, certain arguments or analogies might expand the defining limits of the
notion of the "just" within a dialectic.
It seems then that the Socratic search for definitions is not the attempt
to define an ideal concept but is rather the attempt to deUneate the range within
which something might be said to correspond to a given idea.^ In the case of the
"just" or the "pious," the purpose of finding such a definition would not be to
absolve moral responsibility by a complete determination of "just" or "pious"
action. A definition of piety, for example, will not necessarily render decisions
regarding pious action easier to make. Decisions must still be made from within
a realm of possible choices. Such a definition rather allows one to become more
responsible and autonomous by providing suitable limits to and providing in
sights into this realm of possibility from which decisions are made.
m." GOOD" AND" BAD" DIALECTIC
In order to discover whether Socratic dialectic is in itself a virtuous ac
tivity which can make one better, it is important that we distinguish between
phrase that was causing the problem" (13). The difference in Plato's attempt lies in
the fact that we generally do not concern ourselves over this process, while for Plato
the validity of such a process is a great concem: "Plato does not accept what can be
seen, from certain viewpoints at least, as a basic presupposition imderlying this way
of acquiring confidence about one's judgements and use of language"( 15). Plato (and
Socrates) is concerned with analyzing these presuppositions carefully through dialec
tic.
^ According to this interpretation of the Socratic search for definitions, we can view
Socrates' attempt in the Euthyphro to define piety as successful in that he, in part,
points out the limits of "piety." He establishes the boundaries within which pious ac
tion must be determined; specifically, he shows that the pious must be separated from
the realm of only "what is pleasing to the gods" and determined first within the realm
of virtuous activity.
Socratic Dialectic 19
good and bad dialectic. Socrates was, of course, not the only practitioner of di
alectic. In Socrates' day many others would have called themselves
"dialecticians." However, many of these, while engaging in discourse, did not
become better but were either unfruitful or became worse (i.e. more arrogant,
less willing to "take pains over themselves"). In this sense, the dialectic they
engaged in could be called "bad" or "false" dialectic.
We find several fairly obvious examples of bad dialectic in the
Euthydemus. It should be immediately clear to readers of the Euthydemus that
the dialectical maneuvers of Euthydemus and his brother Dionysodorus do not
bring them any closer to virtue.^ What is not as immediately clear is why this
should be. One must ask: What is it that distinguishes the sophistry of
Euthydemus from Socratic dialectic?
At first glance, the answer to this question might seem simple.
Euthydemus and DionysodcHiis are obviously unconcerned with logic or consis
tency. They seem to take pride in their ability to refute arguments they had pre
viously made. It might seem at first that one could immediately classify the
brothers' dialectic as "bad" on these grounds.
An example of the logical unsoundness of the sophist brothers' argu
ments is found in a humorous interchange in which Dionysodorus asks
Ctessipus if he has a dog. Ctessipus answers affirmatively, whereupon
Dionysodorus also finds out that Ctessipus's dog is a father. Bas^ on these as
sertions, Dionysodorus makes the preposterous claim: "he is a father, and he is
yours; ergo, he is your father" (298d-e). His logical mistake is plain: the adjec
tive denoting possession," yours," does not modify "father" but "dog."
The most obvious mistake of the sophists in the Euthydemus is incon
sistency. Despite this, they are unwilling to be called inconsistent. When
Socrates points out inconsistencies in their statements, they reply," and are you
such an old fool, Socrates ... that you bring up now what I said at first—and if I
had said anything last year, I suppose you would bring that up too" (287a-b).
They do not wish to accept responsibility for their own statements, for their re^
intent is not to aim at truth, but merely to "astound and amaze" others with their
"skill" at wOTd play.
Socrates clarifies the problem of the young sophists, saying, "Even
your skill in the subtleties of logic ... has not found out the way of throwing
another and not falling yourself (288a). As I mentioned earlier, one might at
first believe that herein lies the difference between good and bad dialectic: that the
"good" dialectician is the "skilled" dialectician who uses logically sound and con
sistent arguments, one who in refuting another's position does not contradict
himself. This criterion of logical consistency, however, does not aid us in our
purpose of discovering why Socrates can be confident that through dialectic he
will become better. For Socrates himself sometimes uses arguments which are
illogical and inconsistent.^
^ By "virtue" I am referring to a type of self-understanding which I will develop in the
final section of this essay.
^ A particular example of Socrates' use of inconsistent argument can be seen in the
Alcibiades I. In attempting to lead Alcibiades towards an understanding of the good.
20 Nathan Andersen
It would seem, then, that it would be difficult to argue that Socratic and
sophistic argument can be distinguished simply on the basis of logical consis
tency. We will have to look elsewhere for an adequate distinction. I believe that
there are at least three essential differences which distinguish good dialectic from
bad.
A clue to the first distinguishing mark of good dialectic can be found in
the Alcibiades I. Alcibiades, it seems, had become fully aware of his own
"disgraceful condition" and asked Socrates what he must do. Socrates first tells
him that he must answer the questions asked (i.e. engage in dialectic) and then
gives him the intriguing reassurance that "if we are to put any trust in my div
ination—you and I shall both be in better case"( 127e). That which motivates or
guides the conversation and subsequently allows its participants to be "in better
case" is Socrates "divination."® Perhaps by his "divination" Socrates is referring
to "the god" which motivated him to converse with Alcibiades in the first place
(cf. 103a-b, 105e). It is beyond the scope of this paper to analyze what Socrates
meant by "the god" or his "divination" and in what way these directed the
movement of the dialectic. We only note that for Socrates, at least, some sort of
"god" was extremely important in his quest for knowledge.'
The motivation for sophistic dialectic (at least in the Euthydemus), on
the other hand, seems to be simply the self-aggrandizement of its practitioners.
Evidence of this can be found in the arrogance of Dionysodorus' comment to
Socrates at the beginning of their exposition: "Whichever he answers, said
Dionysodorus, leaning forward so as to catch my ear, his face beaming with
laughter, I prophesy that he will be refuted, Socrates"( 275d). The sophist broth-
Socrates refutes the idea that "goodness" and "intelligence" are equivalent He claims
that a shoemaker is intelligent in the making of foot-gear and so he is good in that
area. On the other hand, he asserts, the same shoemaker is unintelligent in the mak
ing of clothes and is thus bad in that area. Based on these assertions, he claims that if
"goodness" and "intelligence" are equivalent, then "the same man is both bad and
good"( 125a-b). The logical fallacy here is that though the same man is perhaps
"both bad and good" it is clearly not in the same respect. This argiunent is also in
consistent with Socrates' prior reasoning, for Socrates had previously contended
against Alcibiades that a courageous but failed rescue could not be called both good
and evil in the same respect (115c). By his own reasoning, Socrates should realize
that the "shoemaker argument" is invalid. George Klosko points out in "Plato and the
Morality of Fallacy" that Socrates does use "a number of arguments ... which he un
doubtedly knows to be fallacious" (614). He argues that Plato (or Socrates) would not
have viewed this usage to be morally objectionable, but that it was a standard practice
of the day for a speaker to use fallacious argumentation to refute an opponent This
stUl does not help us, however, to distinguish between Socratic and sophistic argu
ment.
® Another statement of what motivates Socrates in his dialectical endeavors can be
found in the Euthyphro where Socrates tells Euthyphro,' The lover of inquiry must
follow his beloved wherever it may lead him"( 14c). Socrates as "the lover of inquiry"
will never be satisfied, for his guide (inquiry) will always continue to lead him.
'Se e, for example, Alcibiades 1124c, where Socrates claims that his case is identical
with that of Alcibiades except in one point: Socrates' master ("the god") is better and
wiser than Alcibiades' master.
Socratic Dialectic 21
ers are not motivated to seek understanding, but rather intend to prove their clev
erness by refuting any possible answer.
A second distinguishing feature of Socratic dialectic is that it is gen
uine. Hans-Georg Gadamer points this out, saying, "The difference between
Socrates and the sophists is in no way an obvious one; rather it is a difference
evident only to someone who has not only the logos [word] in view but also the
ergon [deed]"( 5). Socrates truly wanted to become better, to learn, and was thus
willing "to take pains" to improve himself and others through dialogue. It is be
cause of his genuine intent that Socrates' words in dialectic reflect precisely the
deed he was engaged in: the quest fw understanding.
The root of the Socratic intent to become better lies in his recognition
of his own ignorance. Socrates points out that Alcibiades would only inquire "if
[he] thought [he] did not know"( Alcibiades 1109e). For Socrates, the most im
portant knowledge is knowledge of one's own ignorance. It is only by coming to
know this that one will begin to inquire and thus begin to learn. Genuine dialec
tic, then, requires this recognition of ignorance.
A third, and perhaps the most important, feature of Socratic dialectic is
its attempt to cultivate friendship. As 1 have mentioned, the idea of the impor
tance of ialectical friendship was developed in the Alcibiades I. Friendship estab
lishes a basis from which a virtuous dialectical relationship can take place. In
such a friendship, both parties can both become better and provide a means for
the friend to "take pains over [himself]." Friendship provides the most stable
foundation for the virtuous activity of Socratic dialectic.
I have shown some of the ways in which "good" (or "Socratic") and
"bad"( ot "sophistic") dialectic can be distinguished. The first of these is the mo
tivation or guide of the discourse which for Socrates is "the god," "divination,"
or possibly "inquiry." The next is found in Socrates' genuine intent to learn,
which arises out of his recognition of his own ignorance. The final difference is
the pursuit of friendship, which I will examine in the next section in terms of
virtue.
IV. VIRTUE AS AN ACTIVITY
In his article "Socratic Ignorance—Socratic Wisdom," J. Claude Evans
analyzes the Meno—not through a distillation of its philosophical content as if
it were essentially a philosophical treatise, but in order to "interrogate the
movement of the dialogue" (94). From his analysis, Evans determines that for
Socrates," virtue follows the teaching of virtue in the sense that it is essentially
the activity of teaching virtue which is constitutive of virtue itself, which makes
us virtuous"( 105). Evans maintains that despite Socrates' claim to ignorance he
is possessed of the "human wisdom," which he attributes to himself in the
Apology (cf. 20d; 29e-30a; 38a), which is "summed up in the claim that virtue
is rooted in inquiry"( 106).
What Evans has pointed out is that virtue itself is bound up with activ
ity. It does not lie above activity as some prior category, but is rather a term
which describes what takes place in certain types of action or praxis (specifically
the actions of teaching and inquiring into virtue). What "virtue" describes is an
activity in which those involved become better by coming to a greater under-
22 Nathan Andersen
standing of themselves and their relationships with others—which in turn allows
them to act more virtuously.
Friendship can now be seen as a type of relationship in which a virtu
ous movement of understanding can take place. Gadamer describes Socratic
friendship as a "tension-laden relationship in which need and fulfillment coexist"
(18). What is needed (particularly in the case of Socrates and Alcibiades) is to be
come better, more able, and more just The fulfillment of Socratic friendship is a
never-complete process of growth. This growth takes place as the friends through
their dialectical interactions discover their own false assumptions and recognize
their own faults of character—faults which will perhaps only become apparent
when exposed through genuine dialogue with another person.
Socrates engages in dialectic both to estabUsh dialectical friendship and
to investigate the "truth of things" for himself. Through his strict demands for
definition Socrates is able not only to remain aware of his own ignorance, but
also, through the movement of dialectic in response to this demand, to become
better aware of the limits within which his words function. This understanding,
in turn, motivates him to continue to act virtuously. By showing Alcibiades and
others the need for dialectical friendship, Socrates' dialectic also makes them bet
ter. Socratic dialectic, then, consists of a movement in which both Socrates and
his interlocutors do not remain the same, but are rather transformed, becoming
"better men, braver and less idle"{ Meno 86b-c).
BIBUOGRAPHY
Evans, J. Claude." Socratic Ignorance—Socratic Wisdom." The Modern
Schoolman 67.2( January 1990): 91-109.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg." Logos and Ergon in Plato's Lysis." In Dialogue and
Dialectic: Eight Hermeneutical Studies on Plato, translated by P.
Christopher Smith. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1980.
Klosko, George." Plato and the Morahty of Fallacy." American Journal of
Philology 108.4 (Winter 1987): 612-626.
Plato. Alcibiades I. Trans. W.R.M. Lamb, in The Loeb Classical Library, Plato
Vlll, ed. by E. Capps, T.E. Page, and W.H.D. Rouse. London:
William Heinemann Ltd., 1986.
. Euthydemus. Trans. B. Jowett. in The Dialogues ofP lato. New York:
Random House, 1937.
.E uthyphro. Trans. G.M.A. Grube. in Five Dialogues. Indianapolis:
Hacked Publishing Co., 1981.
.L aches. Trans. B. Jowett. in The Dialogues ofP lato. New York: Random
House, 1937.
.P haedo. Trans. B. Jowett. in The Dialogues ofP lato. New York: Random
House, 1937.
. Meno. Trans. B. Jowett. in The Dialogues ofP lato. New York: Random
House, 1937.
Socratic Dialectic 23
Teloh, Henry. The Development ofP lato's Metaphysics. University Park, PA:
Pennsylvania State Press, 1981.
White, Nicholas P.P lato on Knowledge and Reality. Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing Co., 1976.