Aporia, Vol. HI, 1993
HEIDEGGER AND THEOLOGY
Nathan Andersen
I. Introduction
In Being and Time, Martin Heidegger uses theological terms such as
"fallenness" and "temptation" to discuss Dasein's everyday existence. At the
conclusion of his discussion, however, he is careful to qualify that his
analysis is not a theological one. From the standpoint of his interpretation,
he is unable to make judgements about the moral state of Dasein (e.g.
whether man is "drunk with sin"), because, he claims, his interpretation of
Dasein is "prior to any assertion about corruption or incorruption" (224).
Heidegger goes on to claim that "in so far as any faith or 'world view,'
makes any such assertions ... it must come back to the existential
structures which we have set forth, provided that its assertions are to make
a claim to conceptual understanding" (224).
According to Heidegger, if theology wishes to lay claim to
conceptual imderstanding, it must in some sense be grounded in
philosophy. In this paper, I will analyze what Heidegger means by this
claim. I will argue, however, that theology, even in the narrow definition
ascribed to it by Heidegger, is unable to groimd its understanding in pre-
theological interpretations.
n. Heidegger on Theology
In his introduction to Being and Time, Heidegger distinguishes his
own project, that of formulating die question of beiog,f rom the concerns
of the sciences of the various domains of being. He classifies theology as
being one of these "positive" or "ontical" sciences (30-31). Real progress or
movement in such a science does not come from the storing away of facts
or results into manuals, but rather from the science's "inquiring into the
ways in which each particular area is basically constituted" (29). That is,
real progress takes place when the science concerns itself with
ontology—^with understanding what it is that constitutes the "being" of its
specific area of research.
According to Heidegger, "the level which a science has reached is
determined by how far it is capable of a crisis in its basic concepts" (29,
Heidegger's emphasis). To illustrate this, he indicates several sciences
which, at the time of Heidegger's writing, were undergoing crises in their
basic concepts. One of these sciences is theology. Theology, he claims, is
seeking to interpret more primordiaUy "man's Being towards God" (30).
This more primordial interpretation is demanded by the meaning of faith
14 Nathan Andersen
and must remain within faith. Theology is beginning to realize that the
foundations on which it has based its systems of dogma have "not arisen
from an inquiry in which faith is primary," and because of this are not only
inadequate to tihe concerns of theology,b ut also cover up and distort these
concerns (30).
In a lecture entitled 'Phenomenology and Theology," Heidegger
indicates what he means by the claim that ttieology is a "positive science."
Science in general is the "foimding disclosure,f or the sake of disclosure, of
the self contained regions of whatever is, or, as the case may be, of Being"
(6). Science, therefore, has two basic possibilities: sciences of whatever is,
i.e. ontic sciences; and the science of Being, or ontology, i.e. philosophy.
The ontic sciences thematize a given being, something that "is,"
which in a sense is already given prior to the scientific disclosure.
Ontology, while keeping what "is" in view, attempts to look at being in
general. One might say that ontology seeks to understand the sense in
which the objects of ttie ontic sciences are already given prior to the
scientific research. There is only a relative difference between two ontic
sciences (e.g. theology and chemistry),b ased on their differing orientations
towards their specific regions of being. There is, however, an absolute
difference between a positive science (e.g. theology) and philosophy.
A science, then, is the "foimding disclosure of whatever is already
given and in some way already disclosed" (8). What is already given and
in some way disclosed for theology is faith. Theology both begins with
faith and has as its primary object faithful existence.
Faith is "a mode of human existence which .. . arises not from
Dasein or spontaneously through Dasein, but rather from that which is
revealed in and with this mode of existence" (9). Christian faith, for
Heidegger, signifies something like Dasein's way of being specifically
related to that which is revealed to the faithful: Christ and His crucifixion.
This revelation is not simply one in which information about events is
conveyed, but in which one's entire human existence is placed "as a
Christian existence, i.e. one bound to the cross—before God" (10). Such
faith,i n accordance with Heidegger's imderstanding of theology,i s not just
the manner in which theology is properly performed,b ut is also the proper
theme for theology. Theology is the science of faith (i.e. of both belief and
of what is believed), which is both motivated and justified by faith, and of
which the proper purpose is "to help cultivate faithfulness itself (11-12).'
'Is this understanding of theology one which necessarily arises from theology itself?
Traditionally, theology has conceived of itself in-quite broad terms. Robert Cushman
writes that for Augustine, insofar as any "truths" can be found outside of Christian
theology (i.e. in Platonism), "gold and silver was dug out of the mines of God's
providence which are everywhere scattered abroad" (291). It would be up to theology,
which has as its proper function to understand God's providence, to determine the truth
Heidegger and Theology 15
Heidegger specifically attempts to distinguish his own project from
that of theology. In Being and Time,h e points out that the first step towards
a genuine understanding of being consists in "not telling a story" (26). He
does not wish to give a mythological explanation of being which would
simply trace being in general back to another being (e.g. God) which itself
remains unexplained in its being. Such an explanation does not lead to any
genuine understanding of being.
In the History 0/ the Concept of Time, Heidegger indicates why his
own thinking must remain separate from any sort of theology.
Phenomenology and philosophical research,i n general, must stand against
"any sort of prophetism within philosophy and against any inclination to
provide guidelines for life" (80). Philosophical research, he claims, "is and
remains atheism, which is why philosophy can allow itself ^the arrogance
of thinking'"( 80). As long as philosophy understands its function, it cannot
root any of its understandings or conceptions in faith, but must rather look
"to the things themselves."
On the other hand,t heology, which finds its roots as well as its end
in faith, cannot allow itself the "arrogance of thinking." George Kovacs
mentions that for Heidegger," the believer cannot be a philosopher because
through the acceptance of faith he has already answered 'the' philosophical
question( Why are there beings rather than nothing?) and therefore cannot
be regarded as a true questioner" (51). The significance of this point,
however, may be questionable. It seems that the believer has only already
answered "the philosophical question" if she has believed in a mythological
account (i.e. of a being which explains the being of all other beings). It
does seem to be the case that the believer, as a believer, cannot be a
questioner. Yet the inference from such an observation that theology may
have something to leam from the questioner (i.e. the non-believer), is far
from evident.
Heidegger indicates why he believes that philosophy is prior to
theology in a section of Being and Time, which we have looked at entitled,
"The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being." Theology, as an ontic
science, is concerned with a specific region of being. Genuine progress in
such a science occurs when, in the course of its investigations of specific
objects within its proper region of being, it becomes concerned with the
adequacy of its basic concepts to that region of being. In such concern, the
focus of the ontic science becomes ontology. The focus of such ontology
remains, however, within the specific region of being of the concern of the
science. It does not extend to a question of being in general. Such
ontological inquiry, Heidegger argues," remains itself naive and opaque if
in its researches into the Being of entities it fails to discuss the meaning of
of otha: intellectual endeavors. Theology, broadly conceived, functions as the corrective
to all other modes of inquiry.
16 Nathan Andersen
Being in general"( 31). The question of being ("the philosophical question")
is prior to any specific ontological inquiry. Because theology cannot ask
this question, its own specific ontological inquiry is, in some seivse,
dependent on philosophy.
In what sense is theology dependent on philosophy? The ontic
sciences attempt to disclose a region of being. In the case of theology, this
region is "that which is revealed in and with" faithful existence
("Phenomenology and Theology" 9). Yet prior to its scientific disclosure,
faithful existence is already disclosed to a certain extent. And prior to
theology, faith is, to some degree, already imderstood. According to
Heidegger,t his pre-sdentific understanding can be clarified by philosophy.
"Whatever is discloses itself only on the grounds of a preliminary
.. . preconceptual understanding of what and how it is. Every ontic
interpretation operates within the basic context of an ontology" (17, my
emphasis). However, this ontology remains for the most part hidden.
Qtristian existence, for example, is a mode of existence in which one's
"pre-faith-ful, i.e. imbelieving, human existence is sublated {aufgehoben)"
(18). One's pre-Christian existence is not thereby done away with, but is
kept up and preserved; it is "ontologically included within faith-full
existence" (18). Because theological concepts include pre-Christian
meanings," they have as their ontological determinants meanings which are
pre-Christian and which can thus be grasped purely rationally" (18, my
emphasis). Since aU theological concepts occur only to Dasein, they must
contain the basic understanding of being which belongs to Dasein, as
being-in-the-world.
As an example, Heidegger points to the concept of sin. Since sin is
a phenomenon of existence,i ts proper conceptual understanding demands
a return to the concept of "guilt" which is itself "an original ontological
determination of Dasein" (19). Inasmuch as tiieology understands
appropriately the basic constitution of human existence, it will demand a
return to the ontological origins of the concept of guilt, which are only
foimd through Heidegger's asking of the question of being. Such pre-
Christian concepts wUl not, of course, become the primary factors in
determining theological concepts, but function "only as a corrective to the
ontic, and in particular pre-Christian, meanings of basic theological
concepts" (19).
Fin^y, Heidegger insists that the demand that his pre-Christian
ontology serve as a corrective to theology is not his own demand, but is
demanded by theology itself, "insofar as it understands itself to be a
science" (20). It is not part of the essence of philosophy to serve a
corrective function for theology. It takes on this function when the
theologian, deliberating on the problems which corresjwnd to her own
ontic area, "comes upon the basic traditional concepts and, furthermore,
questions their suitability" for the theme of her own science (21). When this
Heidegger and Theology 17
occurs,s he can look back for the "original ontological constitution" of these
concepts within philosophy.
in. The Corruption of Man
Heidegger states:
Insofar as any faith or 'worldview,' makes any such
assertions [regarding the corruption or incorruption of man]
... it must come back to the existential structures which we
have set forth, provided that its assertions are to make a
claim to conceptual understanding. {Being and Time 224)
If indeed "conceptual understanding" is a proper aim for theology, what
would constitute an assertion about the corruption of man which could lay
claim to such understanding?
All interpretation, according to Heidegger must be "founded
essentially upon fore-having,f ore-sight,a nd fore-conception"( 191).I n order
to interpret at all, that which is interpreted must be "had" in some way in
advance. Interpretation is also grounded in what and how the object is
seen prior to interpretation. In each case,t hat which is "fore-had" and "fore
seen" is understood in a specific manner. This definite way of conceiving
in advance constitutes the "fore-conception."
Theology, as a mode of interpretation, must both begin and end
with faith. This means that that which is interpreted must be "fore-had" by
way of faith, it must be "fore-seen" with the "eye of faith," and it must be
"fore-conceived" in a manner which agrees with that which is revealed by
faith. That theology must end in faith indicates that what has been
interpreted will,i n its interpretation, "remain and become anew" the object
of faith ("Phenomenology and Theology" 21). Theology cannot accept as
a foimdation a "system of dogma" which "has not arisen from an inquiry
in which faith is primary." Such a "foundation" is not only "inadequate for
the problematic of theology, but conceals and distorts it" {Being and Time
30).
A theological interpretation or assertion of the "corruption or
faUenness of man" must find its beginnings in faith. The meaning of faith
is best found in that which is revealed in and through faithful existence.
We find this revelation for the most part in scripture.
The apostle Paul speaks of the fallen state of man as follows: "Even
the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and
upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: For all have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God"( Romans 3:22-3).^ All men have fallen
^Biblical citations are taken from the King James' Version of the Bible.
18 Nathan Andersen
short and,t herefore,c annot be righteous except by the faith of Jesus Christ.
This scripture does not yet show why man is corrupt, yet does indicate
that such corruption involves "falling short" of some sort of standard. A
thorough analysis of the question of the corruption of man would attempt
to understand (through scripture) what it is ^at constitutes the standard
from which all men fall short. This analysis would attempt to determine
why man has fallen and in what manner his redemption might take place.
The analysis of corruption must,a ccording to Heidegger,i n the end
come back to the grounds for the possibility of such corruption: Dasein as
being-in-the-world.I f this analysis wishes to lay claim to conceptual clarity,
it must go back to Heidegger's analysis of "everyday Being-in-the-world"
in whidh he discovers both the authentic and inauthentic modes of
existence in Dasein's "throwness" and in its "falling" (224).
One of these modes of existence is Dasein's essential character of
Being-guilty. Heidegger claims that "this essential Being-guilty is,
equiprimordiaUy, the existential condition for the possibility of the
'morally' good and for that of the 'morally' evil—^that is, for morality in
general and for the possible forms which this may take tactically" {Being
and Time 332). In order to imderstand what Heidegger means by the claim
that morality in general presupposes what he describes as the essential
"Being-guilty" of Dasein, we will briefly note the major points of his
analysis of guilt.
Heidegger begins his analysis by examining the "everyday
understanding" of the concept of guilt. Guilt is typically thought of in
terms of the objects in the world with which we busy ourselves and the
persons with whom we find ourselves. One might be guilty in the sense
of "having debts" or "owing." Such guilt is primarily related to "that with
which one can concern oneself'( 327). One might also be guilty in the sense
of "being responsible for." Heidegger describes this type of guilt as," Being-
the-basis for a lack of something in the Dasein of an Other, and in such a
manner that this very Being-the-basis determines itself as 'lacking in some
way' in terms of that for which it is the basis" (328). In other words, one
takes upon oneself the responsibility for the failure to satisfy a requirement
which corresponds to one's involvement with other persons.
These ordinary ways of understanding guilt are not satisfactory
explanations of the essential "Being-guilty" which belongs to all Dasein.
Each of these accounts of guilt describes specific behaviors which can be
attributed to Dasein (which is, as such, guilty) but cannot explain the
meaning of guilt as "a kind of Being which belongs to Dasein" (328). "The
phenomenon of guilt," states Heidegger, "can be clarified only if we first
inquire in principle into Dasein's Being-guilty" (328).
In the idea of guilt, Heidegger says, "lies the character of the 'not'"
(329). Guilt indicates a lack, or a nullity. Heidegger finds this nullity in the
essential character of Dasein as thrown projection (i.e. as being-ahead-of-
Heidegger and Theology 19
itself). Dasein, in its existence as "thrown" (i.e. always already existing in
a world), always is one possibility as opposed to others. However, it is
always projected towards other possibilities which it has not yet become.
Because of this, Dasein "as projection is essentially null" (331). This nullity
which permeates Dasein indicates that "Dasein as such is guilty" (331). It
is guilty of not being its potential.
As I have noted, for Heidegger this essential "Being-guilty" is prior
to moral guilt. In Dasein's having definite possibilities, which it does not
have and can no longer choose, lies its essential guilt. Yet Dasein can only
be morally guilty because of its having possibilities and not choosing those
which would constitute the "moral choice."
In order to make the idea of the "corruption of man" "conceptually
imderstandable" we would have to come back, through an analysis which
begins in faith and ends in faith to Heidegger's analysis of Dasein as
"falling Being in the world" (224), and as essentially (and in a primordial
sense)" guilty"( 331). We must recall,h owever,H eidegger's admonition that
a foundation in which faith is not primary is "inadequate for the
problematic of theology"( 30). Does faith remain primary in a study which
begins in faith yet seeks,f or its ontological guide,a n explicitly non-faithful
analysis?
Heidegger's analysis of guilt provides a clue that perhaps faith does
not remain primary. Heidegger would claim that his analysis of Dasein's
"essential Being-guilty" is prior to anything like "man's being guilty before
God." Yet by starting out with Heidegger's analysis, how could one later
speak of the One who through faith is revealed as essentially non-guilty,
that is, Christ? It is not immediately obvious whether an understanding
of the meaning of guilt in the face of a God whose attributes are
discoverable principally in and through faith^ is allowed for by Heidegger's
analysis. If man's guilt before God is not accounted for through the
"existential structures" which Heidegger has set forth, then theology,i n its
necessary devotion to faith, cannot use them. Theology, whose beginning
and end is faith, must remain within faith.
IV. Faith Seeking Understanding
What I have indicated so far is the possibility that theology,i n using
Heidegger's analysis as its ontological corrective, may lose its necessary
emphasize that God is discoverable only in aind through faith in order to argue, in
particular, against the attempt to discover God by a dialectical analysis of what has been
said about Him (cf., for example,J ohn Macquarrie). Such an analysis may indeed discover
a "God" which is essentially compatible with Heideggerian pre-ontology, but this would
not resolve the problem I am attempting to point out, since such an analysis does not
arise and maintain itself in and through faith.
20 Nathan Andersen
relation to faith. Heidegger himself might disagree by pointing out that
theology is only using philosophy as a guide. He writes: "Ontology
functions only as a corrective to the ontic, and in particular pre-Christian,
meanings of basic theological concepts" ("Phenomenology and Theology"
19). In taking philosophy as its guide, theology is not "being led on the
leash by philosophy," but rather philosophy simply clarifies that "region of
Being to which the concept of sin as a concqst of existence must necessarily
adhere" (19).
Heidegger has been very careful not to limit theology in what he
considers to be its essential function (i.e. the disclosure of the meaning of
faith, in and through faith). What he wishes to point out is that theology
qm theology cannot account for existence (and ^erefore cannot lay claim
to "conceptual imderstanding"). The problem which I have hinted at, and
wish to clarify further, is that Heidegger's ontology cannot account for
faithful existence.*
Heidegger acknowledges that from the theological point of view,
philosophy is mere foolishness. Philosophy does not, and cannot, involve
itself in matters of faith. Theology, on the other hand, must start out in
faith. If we take faith as our guide, what can be said about existence?
Heidegger would claim that theology can say nothing, for in its starting
out with faith,i t has already answered "the" question of existence( why are
there beings rather than nothing?). Yet, as I have noted earlier, this point
only applies if faith involves the imquestioning acceptance of a
mythological account. What if such an acceptance does not constitute faith?
What if faith does not involve an immediate answer to the question of
being? In such a case, the possibility remains that the faithful one might
question, while stiU remaining entirely within faith.
One of Heidegger's main concerns is that traditional theology, in
attempting to give an accovmt of man, has taken as its point of departure
both holy writ (i.e. "And God said. Let us make man in our image, after
our likeness." Genesis 1:26) and Greek ontology. Because of this point of
departure, Christian dogmatics "can hardly be said to have made an
ontological problem of man's Being" (Being and Time 74). According to
Kovacs, this remark is not a direct attack on theology as such so much as
it is an attack on the pretended philosophical foundation of Christian
theology. Heidegger's remark "claims only that the so-called ontological
foundation of theology is a misleading foimdation, because it is based on
an interpretation of Being that comes from Greek ontology" (51). Though
Heidegger shows that theology traditionally has not gone back to the
problematic of man's being, he still does not indicate why, in principle.
*By "faithful existence" I mean an understanding of existence as it is revealed
principally in and through faith. Faithful existence is therefore the only "type" of
existence with which theology can concern itself.
Heidegger and Theology 21
theology could not, while remaining in faith, perform such a task.
What,t hen, might theology say about human existence which cannot
be accounted for by philosophy? In connection with the problematic of
guilt, I have indicated one such possibility—man's guilt before God.
Scripture hints at other possibilities. John writes;
In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by him;a nd without him was not any thing made
that was made. In liim was life; and the life was the light of men.
Qohn 1:1-4)
In this passage, we read of the Word (Christ) as the creator. Yet to believe
in this account is not to have answered the question of being (i.e. that
Christ created aU that is does not indicate what it means to be). We also
read of the Word as the source of life and light. What is indicated is a
necessary connection of the existence of the Word and of man. However,
as Heidegger makes clear, this passage does not indicate directly the
meaning of "existence" or the idea that existence must mean the same thing
in both the case of the creator and the created. Philosophy, which "is and
remains atheism"{ History 80)c annot even explore the possible implications
of John's words.
If scripture does indicate the necessary connection between the
existence of tibe Word and man, it would seem that the most primordial'
interpretation of existence from the standpoint of theology would
necessarily include such a possibility. If Dasein is "Being-in-the-world as
alongside things and with-others" (cf. Being and Time 207 and 220) then
should not a more primordial interpretation, from the standpoint of
theology, include something like "through-Christ"?
^ far I have only hinted at the possibility of a theological
interpretation which might, while remaining within faith, lay claim to
conceptual understanding. The realization of such a project, as well as its
justification are beyond the scope of this paper. What remains to be asked,
however, is whether, given Heidegger's critique, the proper aim of
theology is conceptual understanding. Is conceptual understanding
compatible with faith? If not, what is the relevance of Heidegger's analysis
5Here I am using "primordial" to indicate an interpretation which "not only demands
that in general the hermeneutical situation [the "fore-having," "fore-sight," and "fore-
conception"] shall be one which has been made secure in conformity with the phenomena;
it also requires explicit assurance that the whole of the entity which it has taken as its
theme has been brought into the fore-having" {Being and Time 275). A primordial
interpretation is one which, from the start, allows the whole of the phenomena to come
into view.
22 Nathan Andersen
of theology?
Bibliography
Cushman, Robert E. "Faith and Reason." A Companion to the Study of Saint
Augustine. Ed. by Roy W.B attenhouse. New York: Oxford UP,1 955.
GaU, Robert S. Beyond Theism and Atheism: Heidegger's Significance for
Religious Thinking. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1987.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Trans. John Macquarrie and Edward
Robinson. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1962.
—. History of the Concept of Time. Trans. Theodore Kisiel. Bloomington:
Indiana UP, 1992.
—." Phenomenology and Theology." Trans. James Hart and John Maraldo.
The Piety of Thinking. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1976.
Kovacs, George. The Question of God in Heidegger's Phenomenology.
Evanston: Northwestern UP, 1990.
Macquarrie, John. In Search of Deity. New York: Crossroad, 1985.