Aporia Vol. 11 number 1, 2001
Indispensability and Naturalism
David J. Anderson
Indispensability arguments in the philosophy of mathematics have
recently become the subject of much criticism (cf. Kitcher; Field; Sober).
To my mind, the most compelling of these criticisms comes from Penelope
Maddy in "Indispensability and Practice." Maddy considers two doctrines,
owing primarily to W. V. Quine, which motivate indispensability argu
ments: confirmation holism and naturalism. Naturalism, in Maddy's view,
is incompatible with confirmation holism; thus, indispensability arguments
lose their support. In defense of indispensability theory, Mark Colyvan
argues that Maddy's criticism depends on an unsatisfactory conception
of naturalism. For Colyvan, under a proper (Quinean) understanding of
naturalism, Maddy's incompatibility disappears.
So the debate turns on a conception of naturalism— each protagonist
arguing for what they believe is the more "attractive" candidate. In my
opinion neither account is suitable because both unnecessarily conflate
realism with ontological commitment. Thus, Colyvan is correct to criticize
Maddy's version of naturalism, but the Quinean naturalism he recom
mends does not provide a suitable alternative. Rather, a "compromise
naturalism" that talks in terms of realism, not ontological commitment,
provides the best defense of indispensability from Maddy's criticism.
Since Maddy's criticisms attack the motivations for indispensability theory,
we ought to consider these motivations in depth.
David Anderson is a senior majoring in philosophy at Stanford University.
58 David ]. Anderson
Motivations for the Indispensability Argument
Due to Quine and Hilary Putnam, the doctrine of naturalism
provides the primary support for the standard indispensability argument.
Standard Quinean naturalism respects the methods of science, to the
denial of first philosophy. Consider Quine's oft-quoted statement:
Naturalism: abandonment of the goal of a first philosophy....The
naturalistic philosopher begins his reasoning within the inherited
world theory as a going concern. He tentatively believes all of it,
but believes also that some unidentified portions are wrong. He
tries to improve, clarify, and understand the system from within.
(Theories 72)
Clearly, we are meant to use the methodology and theories of natural
science as a starting point for philosophy. In particular, when we ask "what
exists," we should first look to natural science for the answer. For Quine,
the "ontological questions, under this [naturalized] view, are on a par with
questions of natural science"( "Dogmas" 45). So under standard Quinean
naturalism, we answer questions of ontology by consulting natural science's
best theory of the world.
In this way, naturalism counsels us against an ontological com
mitment to entities outside of natural science—ghosts, say. To have
ontological commitment to ghosts would be an affront to naturalism
because it would disagree with science on nonscientific grounds. Note,
however, that naturalism does not counsel us to incorporate all the entities
of science into our ontology. Indeed, even scientists may view certain
elements of a physical theory as merely useful fictions that help describe
and predict observable results. The massless neutrino of particle physics
might have fallen into this category at one time. Naturalism alone limits
our ontology to the entities of natural science but does not require our
ontology to contain all elements of natural science.
Complementing naturalism, confirmational holism is the thesis that
scientific theories are confirmed and disconfirmed as wholes. The tradi
tional notion of empirical confirmation, rigorously defended by Rudolf
Camap, holds that scientific statements are confirmed or disconfirmed by
empirical evidence. For example, the evidence that confirms "F = ma"
does not necessarily confirm other laws of Newtonian physics except
Indispensability and Naturalism 59
through a coincidence. Quine disagrees: "In taking the statement as
[the] unit [of confirmation] we have drawn our grid too finely. The unit
of empirical significance is the whole of science" ("Dogmas" 42). If a
statement s in our best world theory is refuted by empirical evidence, then
our whole world theory requires revision, not just s. Famously, Quine
writes," Our statements about the external world face the tribunal of sense
experience not individually but only as a corporate body"( 41).
The combination of naturalism and confirmational holism recom
mends an ontology containing all and only the objects of the natural
sciences. The argument is straightforward. Let S be the set of entities
from the language of natural science. Let N be a subset of S to which
naturalism alone requires ontological commitment. Let M be the set S-N.
By confirmational holism, observations that confirm theories using
elements of N also confirm theories using elements of M. If theories
involving N and M have the same support, then we would be holding an
"ontological double standard" to give elements of N special ontological
status over elements of M. Thus, we ought to have ontological commit
ment to all and only elements of S.
Unfortunately, many rival physical theories are confirmed by
empirical results—a motivation for the indispensability requirement.
Empirical data that confirms a physical theory of the world T also confirms
a less attractive theory of the world T'. Indeed, T and T' may contain
different entities altogether. This insight motivates the requirement of
indispensability: we should have ontological commitment to all and
only those entities that are indispensable to our best theory of the
world. To paraphrase Colyvan, an entity is indispensable if either (1) it
is not eliminable from our theory or (2) its elimination from our theory
creates a less "attractive"' theory ("Arguments").
In all, considerations of naturalism, confirmational holism, and
indispensability lead us to this conclusion: we should have ontological
commitment to all and only those entities that are indispensable to our
best theory of the world. What does this mean for mathematics?
'Colyvan suggests, correctly I believe, that a definition of attractive should
"appeal to the standard desiderata for good scientific theories: empirical suc
cess; unificatory power; simplicity; explanatory power; fertility and so on"
("Arguments").
60 David J. Anderson
Mathematics and Indispensability
Much like quarks, leptons, and protons, entities of mathematics are
indispensable to our best theory of the world. In fact, Putnam goes further,
arguing that mathematics is the language that makes much of natural
science possible. Measurement,f or example, requires that we quantify not
only things like distance and masses, but also quantify "over functions from
masses, distances, etc. to real numbers, or at any rate to rational numbers"
(74). For indispensability theorists like Putnam and Quine, mathematics
is indispensable to our best theory of the world; thus, we should have
ontological commitment to mathematical entities.^ However, this con
clusion brings the question, should we have ontological commitment to
all mathematical entities?
Quine and Putnam argue that some mathematics is dispensable to
science and does not warrant ontological commitment. The Quinean
account suggests a tripartite view of mathematics. First, some entities of
mathematics,l ike the rational numbers, are clearly indispensable to science
because they are part of many successful direct applications of mathematics
to science. Second, some entities of mathematics are indispensable to
science because they form "simplificatory rounding out" of applied mathe
matics. These systems are not directly interpretable in the physical world
but are formed in partial analogy to systems that are interpretable.
Finally, some entities of mathematics are neither applied nor part of any
reasonable simplification of interpreted mathematics. Predictably, Quine
argues that mathematics in the first two categories require ontological
commitment. That in the third category, however, Quine looks "upon only
as mathematical recreation and without ontological rights"( "Reply" 400).
Having outlined the standard Quine/Putnam indispensability
argument, we can begin to assess Maddy's criticism.
Maddy's Criticism
Maddy observes that the scientific community does not accept the
existence of an entity simply because it is indispensable to a well-confirmed
Tield challenges Putnam on this point, arguing that mathematics is dispensable
for science. He takes this dispensability to recommend a nominalist approach.
INDISPENSABILITY AND NATURALISM 61
theory. Consider the case of atomic theory during the latter half of the
nineteenth century.^ Some physicists were skeptical of the atom's existence
long after atomic theory had seen substantial experimental confirmation.
These scientists, including Poincare, certainly considered the atom a useful
entity for explaining observable results but were unconvinced that the
atom physically existed. For Maddy, historical considerations like
these show that in the actual practice of science, scientists do not
always equate empirical confirmation of an indispensable entity with
physical existence.
For Maddy, this observation alone reveals a deep incompatibility
between naturalism and confirmational holism. If we take naturalism
seriously, we should respect the scientists' judgment and draw a "distinc
tion...between parts of a theory that are true and parts that are merely
useful" ("Indispensability" 281). From those entities of science that are
"merely useful," we withhold ontological rights. However, confirmational
holism requires us to grant ontological rights to all elements of our best
scientific theory—even elements that are merely useful for fear of an
"ontological double standard." Naturalism and confirmational holism
differ on this point; thus they are incompatible.
Strictly speaking, Maddy's objection does not show that Quinean
naturalism is incompatible with confirmation holism. Sure, Quine's natu
ralism limits our ontology to entities of our world theory, but it "believes
also that some unidentified portions [of that theory] are wrong" (Theories
72). So if confirmational holism is correct, the tum-of-the-century skeptics
were simply wrong. No incompatibility exists. If that is the case, then what
does Maddy's objection purport to show?
To be precise, Maddy is arguing (1) that Quinean naturalism is too
"weak" and (2) that the naturalism we ought to have is incompatible
with confirmational holism. Maddy even admits, "Logically speaking,
[the Quinean] holistic doctrine is unassailable" ("Indispensability" 280).
However, Maddy wishes to convince us that Quinean naturalism
diverges from scientific practice in ways that are intolerable for a "serious"
naturalist. What's more, through this objection Maddy begins to spell out
what kind of naturalism we ought to have. Maddy is clearly committed to
a naturalism in which "if philosophy conflicts with [scientific] practice, it
^This is the example considered by Maddy ("Indispensability" 280-81).
62 David J. Anderson
is the philosophy that must give"( "Naturalizing" 176). Thus, right from
the start this serious naturalism, which I will hereafter call "Maddy's nat
uralism," is incompatible with confirmational holism. We have seen one
way in which Maddy's naturalism differs from Quine's. As her critique pro
gresses, the two accounts diverge even more.
On Maddy's view, considerations of mathematical practice provide
further impetus for abandoning Quinean indispensability theory. For
example, continuum mathematics is arguably a paradigmatic case of
mathematics' indispensable role in scientific theories. Thus, "the [indis
pensability] argument goes, we have good reason to believe in the entities
of continuum mathematics, for example, the real numbers" (Maddy,
"Indispensability" 284). The indispensability theorist, then, must accept
that statements about real numbers and sets of real numbers have deter
minate truth-values—there must be a fact of the matter to the statement's
truth or falsity. Maddy calls this fact. Now consider the statement s|: Z
are Lebesgue measurable. Because s is independent of the Zermelo-
Fraenkel axioms, we cannot settle the "fact of the matter" by provability
(Maddy, "Indispensability" 283). Rather, the mathematician relies on
other, extrinsic, sources of evidence—aesthetics, new methods, inter-
theoretic connections—to determine this "objective" fact. In all, as long
as real numbers are indispensable to our world theory, the truth of s is a
legitimate mathematical question.
However, should real numbers become dispensable to our world
theory, s ceases to have a determinate truth-value. The dispensability of
real numbers to natural science would require the indispensability theorist
to deny ontological rights to real numbers. Thus, questions about sets of real
numbers, like the question of Lebesgue measurability, lose their meaning.
Maddy states that "if all the remaining applications of continuum mathe
matics were explicitly understood as 'approximations' or 'idealizations'
[then the] indispensability theorist would retreat to some version of
[nominalism]," in particular with regards to s ("Indispensability" 286).
Maddy calls this no'fact.
The first important point for Maddy is that the choice between
nO'fact and fact hinges on developments in physics. The problem of quan
tum gravity leads many physicists to suspect that space-time may not be
continuous. If space-time is not continuous, it may be possible to remove
continuum mathematics from all physical science. Clearly," adherence to
fact could be overthrown by progress in physics" ("Indispensability" 286).
INDISPENSABILITY AND NATURALISM 63
The second important point is that this switch from fact to no'fact
has methodological consequences that contradict mathematical practice.
Fact recommends mathematicians use all their best methods to determine
the correct truth-value of s. However, if developments in physics recom
mend nO'fact, then mathematical methods must change. At worst, we
consider the question of Lebesgue measurement meaningless and abandon
the pursuit of a truth-value for s altogether—a clear change of method
ology."* At best, the mathematician continues to investigate s holding
"that there is no fact of the matter about [s], but that there are still good
mathematical reasons...to adopt a theory that decides our question one
way rather than another" ("Indispensability" 287). But this pursuit is
based upon "mathematical canons of correctness" and not truth—
another change of methodology.' In any case, developments in physics
change mathematical methodology.
These two points constitute Maddy's mathematical practice objection
to indispensability theory. Mathematicians do not, in practice, allow
developments in physics to affect their methodology. In certain cases,
however, indispensability theory recommends mathematicians adjust
methodology in response to developments in physics. Thus, if we are
"serious" naturalists, we should reject indispensability theory.
Here Maddy's naturalism departs from Quinean naturalism in a
second way. Remember that Maddy first diverged from Quinean natu
ralism by asserting that science is privileged over philosophy, while Quine
only asserts philosophy is not privileged over science. In her latest objection,
Maddy departs further by extending her naturalism to cover mathematical
practice. Quinean naturalism applies to only scientific practice.
Indeed, like Maddy's first objection, the mathematical practice
objection is ineffectual using Quinean naturalism. Under the Quinean
view, the move to no-fact still requires methodological change for the
mathematician. This change reflects a move from mathematics with onto-
logical rights to "recreational" mathematics. However, this methodological
change does not conflict with Quinean naturalism because Quinean
naturalism applies to only scientific methodology. For Quine, indispens
ability theory can and ought to recommend changes to mathematical
■♦Maddy calls this position end of the story no-fact ("Indispensability" 287).
'Maddy calls this position beginning of the story no-fact ("Indispensability" 288).
64 David]. Anderson
practice. Thus, the mathematical practice objection does not, strictly
speaking, refute Quinean indispensability theory, it merely recommends
Maddy's naturalism, which is incompatible with indispensability theory,
over Quine's.
In all, we have a choice between two brands of naturalism: Maddy's
and Quine's. Quine's naturalism has much to recommend it. First, it is
compatible with indispensability theory, justifying an ontology of certain
parts of mathematics. Second, it avoids troubling ontological "double
standards" through its compatibility with confirmational holism. Quinean
naturalism, though, does have the unfortunate habit of recommending
change to both mathematical and scientific methods on philosophical
grounds. On the other hand, Maddy's naturalism resonates with actual
mathematical practice in ways that Quine's does not, but at the cost of
abandoning indispensability theory. What's more, because Maddy's natu
ralism (1) puts practice above philosophy and (2) applies to mathematics,
Maddy's naturalism commits us to rubber-stamping mathematical practice
in troubling ways. For example, should mathematicians approach a certain
area of mathematics using correct mathematical methodology, Maddy's
naturalism counsels us to interpret the area in question realistically. It
seems, then, that the act of mathematical investigation implies the exis
tence of some class of mathematical entities (Colyvan," Defence" 55-56).
Instead of choosing between the two brands of naturalism, I believe
there is room for a compromise between them. Foremost, this "compromise
naturalism" recognizes the distinction between realism and ontological
commitment.
Compromise Naturalism
A realist believes( 1) that the sentences of a given theory are true or
false and (2) that something external to the human intellect confers this
truth-value (Putnam 69-70). Notice that neither (1) nor (2) requires
ontological commitment to entities of that theory. Rather, ontological
commitment just provides one account of what is to be "external to the
human intellect." There are other accounts—modal-realist accounts in
particular—that also satisfy (2). While ontological commitment requires
realism, realism does not require ontological commitment.
Compromise naturalism is defined to build on this distinction.
Compromise naturalism has three properties;
INDISPENSABILITY AND NATURALISM 65
Property 1: Like Quinean naturalism, compromise naturalism holds that
we should have ontological commitment to only (not necessarily
all) those entities of our best natural scientific theories.
Property 2: Like Maddy's naturalism, compromise naturalism is extended
to mathematics.
Property 3: When investigators (from mathematics or science) employ
sound methodology to determine the truth-value of a statement,
compromise naturalism requires that we be realists with respect to
that statement.
Having defined compromise naturalism, we can see how it avoids the
pitfalls of both the Quine and Maddy versions of naturalism.
First, compromise naturalism "works" in indispensability theory. The
first property of compromise naturalism limits our ontology to only entities
of the natural sciences. By the "double standard" argument, confirmational
holism expands our ontology to all entities of the natural sciences.
Therefore, we should have ontological commitment to all and only
those entities that are indispensable to our best theory of the world.
This is exactly the same conclusion we reach using Quinean naturalism,
so "swapping" compromise for Quinean naturalism does not affect indis
pensability theory.
Second, compromise naturalism is compatible with confirmational
holism in both the situations outlined in Maddy's objections. Consider
Maddy's first objection, where scientists were skeptical of the atom's
existence despite its empirical confirmation in our best theory of the
world. Indispensability theory argues that scientists were simply wrong
to doubt the existence of the atom. Does this conflict with compromise
naturalism? Compromise naturalism does not privilege science over
philosophy, so indispensability theory's critique of atom skeptics is
compatible with compromise naturalism in this respect. Only the third
property of compromise naturalism has the potential to conflict with
indispensability theory in this scenario. Fortunately, it does not. Since
skeptical scientists came to their conclusion using sound scientific methods,
compromise naturalism requires that we take a realist stance towards
the atom's existence. That these scientists were wrong does not prohibit
a realist stance. Thus, compromise naturalism is compatible with indis
pensability theory in Maddy's first scenario.
66 David J. Anderson
Compromise naturalism is compatible with indispensability theory in
Maddy's second scenario as well. In this scenario, developments in physics
coupled with indispensability theory have removed ontological rights from
the real numbers. Presumably, mathematicians were pursuing the question
of Lebesgue measurability using sound methodology. Thus, compromise
naturalism requires us to be realists towards this question. Does the removal
of ontological rights preclude us from being realists about the question
of Lebesgue measurability? No. Ontological commitment requires realism,
but realism does not require ontological commitment. Thus, compromise
naturalism is compatible with indispensability theory in Maddy's second
scenario.
Third, compromise naturalism does not advocate changes to the
practice of mathematics. Removing ontological rights from the real
numbers merely moves real-analysis from the domain of mathematics with
ontological commitment to that of realist (non-recreational) mathematics.
This switch does not have implications for mathematical practice. In both
domains, there is an external fact of the matter concerning the tmth-value
of mathematical statements. The mathematician does not care why there is
a fact of the matter, so methods do not change when her work moves from
the domain with ontological rights to the realist domain.
To sum up, compromise naturalism avoids many of the pitfalls of
Quinean naturalism and Maddy's naturalism. Namely, it preserves the
consistency of indispensability theory without changes to mathematical
practice. In this way, I believe compromise naturalism is a more attractive
candidate than either Maddy's naturalism or the Quinean naturalism
that Colyvan advocates. Before closing, I want to consider two possible
objections to this conclusion.
Objections
First, one might object that compromise naturalism and indis
pensability theory advocate changes in scientific practice on nonscientific
grounds.*" In Maddy's first scenario, indispensability theory argues that
^Note that coupling compromise naturalism with indispensability theory does not
advocate changes to mathematical practice on nonmathematical grounds. For
example, the move from Platonist to realist mathematics did not affect methodology.
Indispensability and Naturalism 67
scientists were wrong to be skeptical of the atom—even if that skepticism
was based on sound scientific methodology. While this does not show
any inconsistency between compromise naturalism and indispensability
theory, it does show how indispensability theory can refute scientific con
clusions on nonscientific grounds. For those with "serious" naturalist ten
dencies, this seems to pose an intractable problem for compromise
naturalism.
In response, I would argue that a good philosophy of science keeps
scientists honest in exactly this way. I do not deny that in certain situations
compromise naturalism coupled with indispensability theory can advocate
changes to scientific practice. However, this does not automatically
degenerate compromise naturalism. In Maddy's scenario, indispensability
theory exposed the ontological double standard of skeptical physicists.
Just because physicists followed accepted scientific methodology does not
excuse them from unjustifiably (Quine would argue) denying ontological
rights. Indispensability protects scientists from this intellectual "dishon
esty." Indeed, where compromise naturalism and indispensability theory
advocate changes to scientific method, 1 believe science benefits.
A second objection might be that it is hard to see how one can
be a realist with respect to mathematical entities that do not exist. In
the scenario where space-time is discrete, we admit that there is a fact of the
matter about Lebesgue measurability of E j sets, but that these sets do not
exist (i.e., they do not have ontological rights). What justification, then,
do we have for saying there is a "fact of the matter" about these sets?
Indeed, how can there be a fact of the matter about anything that does
not exist?
In response, this objection only vitiates compromise naturalism if
Platonism is the only form of realism. Fortunately, there are many other
forms of realism. At its core, realism in mathematics is the thesis that
mathematics makes assertions that are objectively true independent of
our thought. To be sure, realism in mathematics has traditionally been
associated with object Platonism, but Platonism is not the only form of
realism. Different variants of structuralism and modalism, for example,
have worn the realist mantle (cf. Resnik 239-40; Hellman). As long as
there exist alternate accounts of realism, compromise naturalism can
assert there is a fact of the matter about nonexistent entities.
For Maddy, considerations of practice justify our rejecting not just
Quinean naturalism, but indispensability theory altogether. Compromise
68 David J Anderson
naturalism allows us to preserve mdispensability theory without the changes
in scientific and mathematical practice Maddy finds ohjectionahle
Considerations of practice may force us to abandon Qumean naturalism,
hut they do not invalidate mdispensability theory
Indispensability and Naturalism 69
Works Cited
Colyvan, Mark." In Defence of Indispensability." Philosophia Mathematica
6 (1998): 39-62.
• "Indispensability Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics."
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ed. Edward Zaita. 18 November
1999. <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mathphil-indis/>.
Field, Hartry. Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980.
Hellman, Geoffrey. Mathematics without Numbers: Towards a Modal-
Structural Interpretation. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Kitcher, Philip. The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1983.
Maddy, Penelope. "Indispensability and Practice." Journal of Philosophy
89 (1992): 275-89.
• "Naturalizing Mathematical Methodology." The Philosophy of
Mathematics Today. Ed. Matthias Schirn. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998. 175-93.
Putnam, Hilary. Mathematics, Matter and Method: Philosophical Papers.
Vol. 1. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Quine, W. V." Reply to Charles Parsons." The Phibsophy ofW. V. Quine.
Ed. Lewis Edwin Hahn and Paul Arthur Schilpp. La Salle, IL:
Open Court Press, 1986. 400-01.
• Theories and Things. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
• "Two Dogmas of Empiricism." From a Logical Point of View.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1953. 20-46.
Resnik, Michael D. Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1997.
Sober, Elliott. "Mathematics and Indispensability." Philosophical Review
102.1 (1993): 35-57.