Aporia Vol. 10 number 1,2000
A Move to More Fruitful Ground?
Analyzing the Challenge of Compromise
Platonism in the Philosophy of Mathematics
DAVID]. ANDERSON
W. V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, and Kurt Godel present arguments for
mathematical realism that have come to dominate Platonist philosophies of
mathematics. More recently,P enelope Maddy has argued that mathematics
as understood in Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel Platonism stands in
contrast to actual mathematical practice. In Realism in Mathematics, Maddy
seeks to reconcile this tension— presenting a" compromise Platonism" that
purports to incorporate the best of both Quine/Putnam Platonism and
Godel Platonism. To this end, she provides a compelling naturalistic
account of mathematical intuition and extrinsic justification that accurately
reflects the practice of mathematics. Most important, because Maddy
allows for such varied extrinsic and intrinsic forms of mathematical
support,s he leaves as a challenge the task of determining exactly how we
should evaluate conflicting forms of justification.
However,i n my opinion Maddy's compromise Platonism leaves us ill
equipped to face this challenge. More specifically, it is difficult to see how,
when intrinsic and extrinsic supports disagree, we can proceed without
falling subject to the same criticisms that motivated compromise
Platonism in the first place. We begin with a discussion of
Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel Platonism.
Quine/Putnam Platonism argues that mathematics and the physical
sciences are inextricably linked. Truly, the physical sciences are littered
with mathematical references. From the Law of Universal Gravitation to
the structure of DNA,t he physical sciences use mathematical language to
describe physical phenomena. But could we form a physical theory of
the world without the use of mathematics? Quine and Putnam argue no:
David Anderson is aj unior in philosophy at Stanford University.
74 DAVID J.ANDERSON
the physical sciences' use of mathematics is more than superficial; rather,
mathematics provides the framework that makes possible description and
prediction of physical phenomena that wouldn't be possible otherwise.
As such,Q uine/Putnam Platonism takes knowledge of mathematical
entities to be justified by the role they play in the physical sciences not by
self-evidence or intuition. For Quine/Putnam Platonism, mathematical
objects must exist because they are indispensable for our best theory of
the world. It is this ability, then, of an area of mathematics to provide a
successful framework for the physical sciences that justifies our belief in
this area of mathematics' truth. Putnam writes:
A mathematical theory that has become the basis of a successful and
powerful scientific system, including many important empirical
applications, is not being accepted merely because it is 'intuitive',
and if someone objects to it we have the right to say 'propose some
thing better!'( "Mathematics"3 03)
Thus, for Quine/Putnam Platonism, the application of mathematics
to physical science is its only justification.
The Quine/Putnam version of Platonism draws three notable
objections, the first of which observes that under the Quine/Putnam view,
mathematics loses its a priori and non-empirical status. As discussed
above,Q uine/Putnam Platonism sees mathematics as justified by its role in
our physical theory of the world. However, as any empirical scientist will
tell you, these physical theories are, at best, working hypotheses, not a priori
truths. Thus, if mathematics is justified by its usefulness in a hypothesis
that is subject to change, then the basic mathematical "truths" we take
as a priori are also subject to change. In all, Quine/Putnam Platonism is,
at once, troublesome for mathematicians who believe they are discov
ering necessary truths about the world. Indeed, if Quine/Putnam
Platonism is correct then, like the empirical theories, a mathematical
theory is "essentially a working hypothesis in one form or another...the
sands are constantly shifting, one never finds absolutely solid ground on
which to stand"( Geroch 92).
Second, Quine/Putnam Platonism fails to account for areas of
mathematics that seem obvious, immediately self-evident. In the empiri
cal sciences, the use of even the most elementary mathematics comes at a
high theoretical level. The most basic physical statements make little or
A MOVE TO MORE FRUITFUL GROUND 75
no use of mathematics. At higher theoretical levels, physical statements
gain more mathematical content. However, if even the most elementary
mathematics is not "useful" for basic physical statements, then facts like
2+5=7 should become apparent to us only when we begin to investigate
these higher theoretical physical statements. But as any schoolchild will
tell you, that 2+5= 7 was obvious way before s/he ever began making
highly theoretical physical statements. Thus, Quine/Putnam Platonism
fails to harmonize with the obviousness ofe lementary mathematics.
Third, under Quine/Putnam Platonism, unapplied mathematics is
entirely unjustified. In the actual practice of mathematics, mathemati
cians do not develop mathematics only for its direct application to empir
ical science (though many certainly do). Unapplied mathematics is just as
"true" as applied mathematics. Thus, in the practice of mathematics, the
application of mathematical theory to empirical science is certainly stroke
ofg ood fortune, but never an absolute necessity. Quine/Putnam Platonism
fails to respect this reality of the practice of mathematics.
Godel Platonism takes a substantially different stance, drawing an
analogy between mathematics and the empirical sciences. Godel posits
the faculty of mathematical intuition as a "psychological fact... sufficiently
clear to produce the axioms of set theory" (484). This intuition, then,
allows us to discover those basic mathematical truths (from set theory in
particular) that are self-evident. For Godel,t his intuition for mathematics
is analogous to perception for physical science. Indeed,G odel does not" see
any reason why we should have less confidence in this kind of perception,
i.e., in mathematical intuition, than in sense perception...[for] physical
theories"( 484).I n all, exactly the obviousness ofe lementary mathematics
that was so troublesome under Quine/Putnam Platonism is justified under
Godel Platonism by this faculty of intuition.
Extending this analogy, Godel also argues that some mathematical
postulates, if not intuitable, can still be justified on account oft he postulate's
(1) intuitively evident consequences, (2) usefulness in the physical sci
ences, or( 3)f ruitfulness within mathematics. For Godel, the truths estab
lished by the intuition are not the only mathematical axioms we are justi
fied in accepting. Axioms in the first category( I)a re justified because they
explain or systematize our intuitive data. Just like our model of electrons,
protons, and neutrons systematizes and explains physical phenomena
observable using perception, an axiom is justified when it systematizes or
explains some mathematically intuitive truth. Quine/Putnam-style
76 DAVID J.ANDERSON
indispensability justifies axioms falling under( 2). Perhaps most interesting,
Godel insists that an axiom may he justified (3) if it yields powerful and
elegant tools within mathematics. In particulat, Godel argues that a
new axiom is justified if it has "consequences demonstrable without the
new axiom, whose proofs with the help of the new axiom, however, are
considerably simpler and easier to discover" (477). In all, Godel's sys
tem has bipartite supports: an area of mathematics is justified by either
its self-evidence to the intuition or its fruitfulness in mathematical or
empirical science.
Like the Quine/Putnam Platonism before it, Godel's Platonism is
subject to some common objections. First, Godel Platonism fails to give
an account of exactly how this "mathematical intuition" operates. Even
more basic, Godel needs to give a cogent argument for this intuition's
existence and uniformity in humans. Second, the variety of methods for
justifying an axiom deserve a more careful analysis. For example,s hould a
new axiom really be justified because of its aesthetic value in simplifying
a proof? After all, Godel provides no argument demonstrating that mathe
matical objects like sets are more likely to have tidy elegant properties. In
all, both Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel Platonism are open to some
cogent criticism.
Maddy's own contribution, compromise Platonism, attempts to
avoid such criticisms by taking parts from both Quine/Putnam Platonism
and Godel Platonism. To this end, compromise Platonism argues that we
do have a faculty of mathematical intuition along similar lines to what
Godel proposed; however, this intuition is formed through the cognitive
process of visual perception of sets in the physical world. In allowing
intrinsic support, Maddy hopes to avoid Quine/Putnam Platonism's
unfaithfulness to mathematical practice. At the same time, Maddy adopts
the Quine/Putnam indispensability arguments as an alternative form of
justification for mathematical postulates. Justification from intuition
Maddy calls intrinsic. Justification from indispensability Maddy calls
extrinsic. In the end, Maddy argues that extrinsic justification gives us reason
to believe mathematics is a science on par with natural sciences. Intrinsic
justification, though, accounts for the unique practice of the mathematics.
Let's take a moment to spell out compromise Platonism in more detail.
Maddy begins with a naturalized account of intuition in perception.
Cognitive scientists note that the ability to recognize a triangle, say, is not
inborn. Rather,d uring the first few days ofs ight for newly sighted humans,
A MOVE TO MORE FRUITFUL GROUND 77
subjects need to carefully count edges. However, after some time subjects
leam to perceive that the figure is a triangle quickly. Obviously,s omething
different happens when the subject originally looks at the triangle and
needs to count sides and when the subject identifies the triangle immedi
ately. Maddy cites work by D. O. Hebb (Hebb 122—24) in showing this
learned ability to perceive the triangle immediately is characterized by sets
of nerve cells becoming more efficacious to their neighbors firing. Thus,
without getting into the details, we can say that in the process of learning
to immediately recognize a triangle, the subject gains a measure ofi ntuition
about triangles in general. This intuition is, physically, the pattern ofc ells
that fire when encountering triangle-like objects in the field of vision—
nerve cells that have become efficacious to one another.
By asserting that we perceive sets, Maddy argues, certain properties
of sets (and their corresponding axioms in set theory) become cognitively
intuitive. Under the traditional Platonist view, mathematical objects like
sets are non-spatial and non-temporal. Thus, they cannot be directly
perceived. Maddy argues that we perceive sets when we look into an egg
carton, say, and see twelve eggs. Sets are all around us and we directly
perceive them. More, in the process of perceiving sets we form a sort of
intuition about sets. We notice, or rather our nerve-cells configure
themselves such that we notice, that sets can be combined into new
sets. We notice that sets with the same members have the same size. In
short, Maddy argues that we perceive sets directly, and in the process form
an intuition about the properties of sets. Further, this intuition forms the
intrinsic support for some of the axioms ofs et-theory.
At the same time, compromise Flatonism observes intuition does
not fully support all of the set-theoretical axioms; rather, extrinsic justifi
cations play an important role. Maddy cites the Axiom of Choice as a
set-theoretical axiom with extrinsic support. Zermelo's Axiom of Choice
does not immediately come across as intuitive. However, the axiom has
fruitful consequences. Firstly, the Axiom of Choice is necessary to prove
Cantor's well-ordering hypothesis. Second, without the Axiom of
Choice entire areas of mathematics are unjustified. Indeed, in diverse
fields of mathematics the Axiom of Choice was tacitly assumed; thus, to
deny the Axiom of Choice would be to disqualify large portions of classi
cal mathematics. In allowing extrinsic support, compromise Flatonism
agrees with Zermelo in noting "unprovability...is in no way equivalent
to nonvalidity"( Zermelo 187).
78 DAVID]. ANDERSON
For compromise Platonism, these extrinsic supports come in many
forms. Maddy lists seven types of extrinsic support; verifiable consequences,
powerful new methods for solving open problems, simplifying and systemiz-
ing theory, implying previous conjectures, implying intuitive or aesthetic
truths, and strong intertheoretic connections. In identifying these seven
types of extrinsic support,c ompromise Platonism recognizes that extrinsic
support comes in a wider variety than supposed hy either Quine/Putnam
Platonism or Godel Platonism.
At this point we have seen how Maddy's compromise Platonism
characterizes both intrinsic and extrinsic support. Further we have seen
how accepting both intrinsic and extrinsic support seems to avoid some of
the objections that plagued Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel
Platonism. Maddy even defines another type of support, rules of thumb,
which cannot be intrinsic because they are not based in direct perception
but are nonetheless an "intuitive feeling." How, then, do we weigh all
these different types ofj ustification when they are in disagreement?
This is the challenge Maddy proposes for compromise Platonism—
to provide a way to weigh different types of support for theoretical axioms
in set theory and mathematics as a whole. Maddy remarks, we are left with
"a fundamental problem, the problem of describing, explaining, and
evaluating non-demonstrative arguments in mathematics"( 148). We can
precLsely formulate this challenge; given a prospective axiom, describe
how we can determine the truth-value for this axiom given its differing
levels of intrinsic and extrinsic support. In framing this challenge, Maddy
hopes to have shifted the Platonist dialogue to more fruitful ground.
In my opinion,c ompromise Platonism necessarily leaves us ill-equipped
to meet this challenge. More precisely, 1 believe that under certain circum
stances, it appears highly unlikely that we can meet this challenge without
falling subject to the same criticisms ofQ uine/Putnam and Godel Platonism
that inspired compromise Platonism in the first place.T o demonstrate my con
cern, consider two "prospective" mathematical axioms, one from set theory
(the Axiom ofC hoice)a nd one from geometry (the parallel postulate).
As discussed above,t he Axiom ofC hoice has strong extrinsic support.
The axiom is necessary for parts of important areas of mathematics like
analysis. For example, without the Axiom of Choice we cannot form the
Least Upper Bound axiom for real numbers. What's more, the axiom is "in
principle necessary for science"( Zermelo 187). Clearly, the Axiom ofC hoice
is strongly supported by several different forms ofe xtrinsic evidence.
A MOVE TO MORE FRUITFUL GROUND 79
However, because the Axiom of Choice leads to extremely
counter-intuitive results like the Banach-Tarski paradox,t he negation oft he
Axiom ofC hoice has strong intrinsic support. The Banach-Tarski theorem
shows that if we accept the Axiom of Choice,t hen all spheres are congruent
by finite decomposition. Most counter-intuitively, the unit ball. A, is
equivalent by finite decomposition to the union of two copies of itself.
Obviously,s uch a result clashes with our common-sense intuition concerning
three-dimensional volumes. Namely, the amount of water I can fit in one
ball cannot fill two balls. Even Hilary Putnam saw the Banach-Tarski
theorem as a plausible justification for rejecting the Axiom of Choice
("Models" 429). In all, the Axiom of Choice is clearly well supported
extrinsically and well refuted intrinsically.
Our second example, the parallel postulate, has strong intrinsic
support. To be sure, the parallel postulate is not, when simply stated aloud,
immediately intuitive. However, this venerable postulate is necessary to
form the geometric theorems that mirror common-sense geometric intu
ition. Indeed, without the parallel postulate triangles can consist of three
right angles. Given our substantial intuition concerning geometric
shapes, this seems (intuitively) obviously impossible. Without going into
many examples,I believe it is fairly easy to convince oneself that the parallel
postulate does have substantial intrinsic support.
However, the parallel postulate is outright refuted by extrinsic
evidence. Modem physical observation of light under the influence of
gravity has shown that the actual structure ofo ur universe is non-Euclidean.
Indeed, our universe if filled with warps, bumps, and holes. As such, the
parallel postulate is certainly not true of the physical universe in which
we live. Putnam points to the parallel postulate as an example showing
that "our notions of what is 'self-evident' have to be subject to revision...
in the light of new [physical] theories"( "Mathematics" 302). In all, while
the intrinsic evidence for the parallel postulate is strong, the extrinsic
evidence outright denies the parallel postulate.
Before us we have two cases where the intrinsic and extrinsic evidence
tend to disagree. Maddy's challenge commands us to make a decision
concerning these two axioms. We have three options: (1) side with the
intrinsic evidence,( 2) side with extrinsic evidence, or (3) decide that
the axiom/postulate is neither true nor false.
The first option,s iding with the intrinsic view, leaves us open to the
same criticism of Quine/Putnam Platonism that we purported to avoid in
80 DAVID J.ANDERSON
compromise Platonism. If we honor the intrinsic evidence regarding the
Axiom of Choice, we must reject the Axiom of Choice. Unfortunately,
this implies that entire areas of mathematics (those areas that require the
Axiom of Choice) are unjustified. However, we criticized Quine/Putnam
Platonism for precisely the same reason—that it left large areas of( unapplied)
mathematics unsupported. Thus, if we side with intrinsic evidence we
make ourselves vulnerable to the same criticisms that motivated our use
of intrinsic evidence in the first place. We run into a similar problem with
the parallel postulate. Honoring the intrinsic evidence means affirming
the parallel postulate and rejecting non-Euclidean geometry. However,
this seems to imply that all the work done in non-Euclidean geometry is
not justified and not mathematics. Once again we are subject to the same
criticism that motivates our use of the intrinsic view in the first place.
The second option, siding with the extrinsic view, suggests we are
open to the same criticisms that motivated our use of extrinsic evidence in
the first place. Honoring the extrinsic evidence requires that we deny the
parallel postulate and justify only non-Euclidean geometry. In rejecting
Euclidean geometry, though, we reject one of the most well-studied areas
of classical mathematics. If non-Euclidean geometry is true, then Euclid
was not studying mathematics. Perhaps even more disconcerting, in
abandoning Euclidean geometry it seems that we are not accurately
reflecting the practice of mathematics. When mathematicians discover
that a new area of mathematics is more physically useful, we do not simply
abandon the old domain of mathematics as "wrong." Choosing option
two, commits us to just such a view. Similarly, in honoring extrinsic
evidence we affirm the Axiom of Choice. However, extrinsic evidence is,
presumably, justified by its ability to approximate the truth about mathe
matical entities. However, as Maddy's naturalism dictates, mathematical
entities are "present" in the structure of the world we perceive. But the
world we perceive does not include balls that behave as the Banach-Tarski
paradox would suggest. In short, if our intuition and extrinsic support
approximate the truth oft he same mathematical objects, then how can we
account for their divergence on this matter? We criticized Godel
Platonism for not providing an account of exactly how the different cate
gories of extrinsic support work. In affirming the Axiom of Choice, we
make ourselves vulnerable to the same criticism.
What seems like the best option, assigning neither true nor false to
the axiom/postulate, runs counter to the fundamental realist view. Given
A MOVE TO MORE FRUITFUL GROUND 81
that both non-Euclidean and Euclidean geometry seem to have a place in
our mathematics and that the Axiom of Choice has counter-intuitive
consequences, we might consider not assigning any truth value to these
axioms. Perhaps the question of whether the Axiom of Choice is true is
like asking whether my Honda is red or blue when I don't even own a car.
Indeed, it would be convenient to say that in situations like these, the
mathematician is justified in working in a model with the Axiom of
Choice or without the Axiom of Choice—likewise for the geometer and
the parallel postulate.
Nevertheless, Maddy and her predecessor Godel contend that this is
not an option. Godel observes that "Cantor's conjecture," speaking about
the Continuum Hypothesis but the comment applies for all postulates,
"must either be true or false"( 476). Maddy likens taking the third option
to the "physicist[ solving] the question oft he free quark by adopting a phi
losophy of physics according to which it is not longer a problem"( 129)
which is simply contrary to the spirit of science. This, at once, seems
hypocritical. Maddy takes as almost a Golden Rule, that" the philosopher's
job is to give an account of mathematics as it is practiced, not to recommend
sweeping reform"( 23). Nevertheless, the practice of mathematics clearly
indicates that mathematicians see Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry
as equally true, or at the very least equally mathematical. In rejecting this
third option, as most realist positions including Maddy's require, its seems
that we fail to describe a fundamental aspect of mathematical practice—and
describing and justifying mathematical practice is precisely Maddy's goal.
Thus, it seems highly likely that for certain types of possible axioms,
we are necessarily ill equipped to meet to the challenge of compromise
Platonism. In at least two cases where the intrinsic support disagrees with
the extrinsic support (parallel postulate and Axiom ofC hoice),t here is no
available option for successfully meeting compromise Platonism's chal
lenge. Indeed, based on these two examples, it seems highly likely that
other possible axioms may encounter the same difficulties. TTus, with
respect to at least these two axioms, it appears that when 1 take Maddy's
challenge, I inevitably make myself vulnerable to the traditional criti
cisms of Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel Platonism that compromise
Platonism sought to avoid.
In closing, certainly compromise Platonism identifies the parts of
Quine/Putnam Platonism and Godel Platonism that resonate to a large
extent with the actual practice of mathematics. Further, compromise
82 DAVID] ANDERSON
Platonism provides a much more convincing account of mathematical
intuition than was ever presented in Godel's writing However, we should
not jump to the conclusion that compromise Platonism picks apart Godel
and Quine/Putnam Platonism in precisely the way necessary to avoid
traditional criticisms Rather, it seems that compromise Platonism may
simply avoid these criticisms in the short run, but ultimately become
vulnerable in meeting Maddy's challenge
A MOVE TO MORE FRUITFUL GROUND 83
Works Cited
Geroch, Paul. Relativity from A to B. Chicago: U ofC hicago P, 1978.
Codel, Kurt. "What is Cantor's Continuum Problem?" Philosophy of
Mathematics: Selected Readings. Ed. Paul Benacerraf and Hilary
Putnam. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1983.470-85.
Hebb, D. O. Essay on Mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.,
1980.
Maddy,P enelope. Realism in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1990.
Putnam, Hilary. "Mathematics Without Foundations." Phibsophy of
Mathematics:Selected Readings. Ed. Paul Benacerraf and Hilary
Putnam. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1983. 295-314.
." Models and Reality." Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings.
Ed. Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam.C ambridge: Cambridge UP,
1983.42 M6.
Zermelo, Ernst." A New Proof of the Possibility of a Well-ordering." From
Frege to Gddel: a Source Book in Mathematical Logic. Ed. Jean van
Heijenoort. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1967.183-98.