NIETZSCHE AND PLATO ON THE PHILOSOPHICAL
TASK OF WRITING
Nathan Andersen
The hermit does not believe that any philosopher... ever expressed
his real and ultimate opinions in books: does one not write books
precisely to conceal what one harbors? (Nietzsche, Beyond Good and
Evil, hereafter BOB,4 19)
There does not exist, nor will there ever exist, any treatise of mine
dealing [with the subjects which I seriously study].... Every serious
man in dealing with really serious subjects carefully avoids writing.
(Plato, Epistle VII, 341c-344c)
Plato and Nietzsche seem to share the view that there are dangers to
writing philosophy. Yet both write, and in unique manners. Plato writes
dialogues, and Nietzsche for the most part writes aphorisms. Though
both insist that their own views caimot be discovered directly in their
writings, they are each often accused of precisely the positions they seem
to take great pains to avoid. While Plato is often read as a dogmatist,
Nietzsche is seen as a nihilist. What characteristics of their writing allow
them to be misread in this manner? In this paper I will explore some of
the reasons for which Plato and Nietzsche share similar views on writing.
The forms in which they write, which are governed by their philosophical
positions, allow for the possibility of gross misreading. Yet if we pay
attention to the uniqueness of the forms in which they write, and read
them accordingly, we can see that the concerns of the two philosophers,
far from being opposite, are actually quite similar.
1. Plato on Writing
In the Phaedrus, Socrates tells Phaedrus a myth about the origin of
writing. In his myth, the god Theuth approaches Thamus, king of the
Egyptians, with several arts which he has invented. One of these arts is
writing. Theuth praises writing, saying that it is a branch of learning
which "provides a recipe for memory and wisdom" (274e). Thamus,
however, disagrees. He claims that far from improving memory, writing
will "implant forgetfulness in their souls" (275a). Those who use
writing will no longer need to exercise their memory because they wih be
34 Nathan Andersen
able to rely on the marks on the page, rather than on themselves. Writing
will not teach wisdom, but only the appearance of wisdom. One who
reads much and can repeat what she has read may sound as if she has
great wisdom,e ven if she really understands nothing of which she speaks.
According to Socrates, the myth imphes that those who write and
expect their writings to provide something reliable and permanent are
simpleminded. Written words can do no more than remind "one who
knows that which the writing is concerned with" (275d), but cannot
teach. Socrates points out that there are two major disadvantages of the
written word when contrasted to live discourse. First, written words
is unable to answer questions or respond to objections. He states:
"They seem to talk to you as though they were intelligent, but if you
ask them anything about what they say, from a desire to be instructed,
they go on telling you just the same thing for ever"( 275d). Second, the
written word has no control over whom it addresses: "It doesn't know
how to address the right people, and not address the wrong." When it
does address the wrong people and is wrongly used or imderstood, "It
always needs its parent to come to its help, being imable to defend or
help itself"( 275e).
It seems a wonder that Plato wrote at all when we consider the
things he had Socrates say about writing. Yet Plato does write. Is there
any indication that Plato believes writing can be valuable despite
Socrates' claims?
Socrates teUs Phaedrus the myth about writing in the middle of
their discussion of the possibihty of good speechwriting. Socrates had
already claimed that there is nothing shameful in the mere writing of
speeches; it is in "speaking and writing shamefully and badly, instead
of as one should, that is where the shame comes in" (258d). Following
the myth, Socrates points out that there is a type of discourse which is
of imquestioned legitimacy, which is written in the soul of the learner,
which knows to whom it should speak and to whom it should say
nothing. He is referring to living speech. He claims that those who
have knowledge of what is just, honorable, and good see writing as
merely an enjoyable pastime, while their more serious pursuit is to
find the right types of persons. Having found such a person, one
"plants and sows words founded on knowledge, words which can
defend both themselves and him who planted them"( 276e).
What sort of words are "founded on knowledge"? The only
example Plato gives of one who seriously pursues philosophy is
Socrates himself, and Socrates not only claims to have no knowledge.
Nietzsche and Plato 35
but also insists that he does not teach anything.^ At the same time, it seems
clear that Plato sees Socrates as an example of a just, honorable, and good
man.2How does Socrates "plant and sow words founded on knowledge"?
Socrates does not teach anything. While he has his interlocutors
present ideas for scrutiny, and usually guides the discussion himself,
rarely are any of these ideas definitely ^firmed to be true. What Socrates
does do is find those who think they understand matters of justice and
virtue and show them that they are not wise {Apology 23b). By doing this,
he is able to educate the soul. By revealing the need of others to pursue
philosophy, by inquiring with lliem into matters of justice, he does not
simply give them knowledge of empty words, but gives them living
words; that is, he shows them how to engage in the same activity.
To "plant and sow words founded on knowledge" is, then, not
merely to convey information, but to introduce the learner to the same sort
of experience out of which knowledge grows. In this case, it is to introduce
the person to philosophy by pointing out and inquiring into the leamer's
essential problem: ignorance of matters of justice.
The words must be able to defend themselves. This implies first that
the teacher must be able to consider and respond to objections. Also, if
such words are properly taught, the learner must be able to do more than
simply recite them, he must xmderstand them thoroughly enough to
respond and to see their possible applications outside of the original
context of the discussion in which they originated. It is fairly clear that the
living Socrates and some of his living interlocutors could have satisfied
these demands, but what of the written Socrates? Do Plato's written
dialogues fall prey to the criticisms of writing which Socrates advances in
the Phaedrusl Do Plato's writings constitute a serious philosophical
endeavor or would he have considered them merely an enjoyable
pastime?
If there were a kind of writing which did not give its readers a false
sense of wisdom, which could not simply be recited, but which demanded
that for its proper imderstandmg the reader actually go through the same
sort of experience out of which the writing arose, such writing might
avoid the objections of Socrates. Such writing would need to be able to
defend itself somehow. Such writing would need to address only the
proper audience.
^Cf. Apology 33b.
^Elsewhere I have argued that it is precisely Socrates' inquiries into the good,
honorable and just in which he reveals to his interlocutors their ignorance of
such matters which constitutes his virtue.
36 Nathan Andersen
Several scholars have argued that with dialogue, Plato has foimd
such a form of writing.^ Socrates seems to believe that writing makes
men forget, that it can tell men many things and teach them nothing—
and Plato does not teach anything with his dialogues. The ideas that
are presented for scrutiny are never definitely affirmed to be true. It is
the very nature of dialogue that the ideas which are introduced by one
party and scrutinized by the other are never complete, since another
objection is always possible. Since nothing is taught in the dialogues,
there is nothing for the readers to spout off as if it were their own
wisdom, and there is nothing for readers to forget. Because Plato's
dialogues present several interlocutors with various points of view,
they do actually respond to several possible objections. Careful
reading of a dialogue does not reveal some absolute doctrine, but does
indicate some of the ways in which one can inquire into a problem.
In the Seventh Epistle, Plato writes that "there does not exist, nor
will there ever exist, any treatise of mine dealing with [the subjects
which I seriously study]" (341c). He does not wish to cast these sub
jects "as a prey to the envy and stupidity of the public" (344c). By writ
ing dialogue, he attempts not to display the results of his inquiries
directly, but to hold up an image of what we as readers would have to
do in order that we too might begin to study these "serious subjects,"
that we too might engage in philosophy and concern ourselves with
justice and virtue. He does not wish to set himself up as a wise teacher
of virtue and establish a doctrine that those who have not gone
through his own experiences might recite. Rather, he wishes to show
Socrates, the lover engaged in his seduction of truth. He wants this
image to conjure up wings in the souls of his readers, to show them
the necessity and instill in them the desire to engage in philosophy
also, so that they might become, like Socrates and Plato, lovers of
wisdom.
Before we leave Plato's views on writing, it is important to deal
with what seems to be an obvious case of misreading Plato: that of
Nietzsche himself. While Nietzsche obviously admires both Socrates and
3See Curran, Fisher, Griswold, Hyland, and Krentz. Although each hold
different positions regarding the extent to which Plato, by writing dialogues, can
escape the criticisms of writing he attributes to Socrates, all agree that the major
reasons Plato did not write philosophical treatises are essentially those which
Socrates presents in the Phaedrus, and which Plato himself presents in the
Seventh Epistle( which is, paradoxically, a treatise of sorts).
Nietzsche and Plato 37
Plato/ he often attacks both men vehemently for being responsible for
what he considers the most dangerous error up to now—the "invention of
the pure spirit and the good as such" {BGE 193). Yet if what we have said
about Plato's writing is correct, that it does not teach a doctrine, but rather
attempts to convince its readers to inquire into the important problems
themselves, then neither Plato nor Socrates is directly responsible for the
error to which Nietzsche refers. Rather, the error arises from a misread
ing of Plato, from the attempt to read doctrine where Plato offers only
dialogue.
Several scholars have attempted to resolve the problem of
Nietzsche's relation to Socrates (see Freydberk, Kaufmann, Kofman,
Tejera, and Vincenzo). Victorino Tejera, in Nietzsche and Greek Thought,
analyzes Nietzsche's attitude toward the Greeks in terms of his
(Nietzsche's) views on the use of intellectual history which he sets forth in
"On the Use and Abuse of History." He points out that while Nietzsche
did have some insights regarding Socrates, he was imable to get an accu
rate portrait of Socrates because of his pedagogic envirorrment. He did not
see ^at Socrates' project was essentially similar to his own because he
believed Socrates to be essentially what Nietzsche's contemporaries
viewed him as—the avid proponent of (what was for Nietzsche) a deca
dent morality. Because he did not read Plato dialogically, he was not fuUy
aware of the essential irony of Socrates' positive claims (about "pure
spirit" and the "good-in-itself"). Tejera's reading of Nietzsche, however,
does not take adequate account of Nietzsche's claims about history;
Nietzsche wishes to present a critical history, that is, a history whose
orientation towards the past is governed by the need to live towards the
future. He does not deem important the task of discovering the actual
"historical Socrates" so as to point the accusing finger at him, but he
critiques the Socrates who has been handed down, the Socrates of the
tradition, and shows the advantages and disadvantages of this Socrates for
life.
While Nietzsche's fascination with Plato and Socrates may arise
from his recognition that there is more to the Platonic dialogues than what
the traditional readings had ascribed to them, his primary concern is not
to discover the "real" Plato and Socrates, but to point to problems which
4ln "The Struggle between Science and Wisdom," Nietzsche writes, "Socrates
is so close to me that I am almost continually fighting him" (as cited in Kofman
7). In the preface to Beyond Good and Evil, he calls Plato "the most beautiful
growth of antiquity" and asks whether Socrates is responsible for his errors.
38 Nathan Andersen
have arisen out of the Platonic tradition. Yet what is it about Plato's
writing which allows this type of misreading, misreading which his form
of writing sought to prevent? I will deal with this question in the last
section of this essay, where 1 will also examine a si^ar possibility in
Nietzsche's writings.
II. Nietzsche on Writing
When Nietzsche expresses doubts about the possibility of a preface
bringing its reader closer to the experiences of the book in his preface to
The Gay Science (32), he seems to be concerned with the same problem
that bothered Socrates about writing. Genuine philosophical knowledge
demands that one experience its "truth" and not simply memorize it as a
proposition. "Ultimately," claims Nietzsche," nobody can get more out of
things, including books, than he already knows" [Ecce Homo, hereafter
EH, 717). So what is the value of writing for one who has not had the
essential experience?
We have seen that for Plato, dialogues can serve as an introduction
of sorts to the proper experience—that of practicing philosophy.
Nietzsche also believes that the proper experience is necessary to under
standing his insights. "What a philosopher is," he writes, "is hard to
learn because it cannot be taught: one must 'know' it, from experience"
(BGE 329). What sort of writing might allow initiation into the proper
experience? Nietzsche, like Plato, believes that the style of writing is of
the utmost importance to its educational value. In Ecce Homo, he writes:
"To communicate a state, an inward tension of pathos, by means of
signs . .. that is the meaning of every style .... Good is any style that
really communicates an inward state" (721). With Nietzsche we carmot
separate form from content—the content (the proper state) is determined
by the form or style.
However, when writing, Nietzsche does not simply attempt to
make his experiences tmderstandable to anyone. In the Gay Science he
writes:
One does not only wish to be understood when one writes: one
wishes just as surely not to be understood. It is not by any mearis
necessarily an objection to a book when anyone finds it impossible
to imderstand: perhaps that was part of the author's intention—^he
did not want to be imderstood by just "anybody." All the nobler
spirits and tastes select their audience when they wish to corrununi-
cate.( As cited in Risser 370)
Nietzsche and Plato 39
Like Plato, Nietzsche recognizes that not everyone is prepared for
his insights. In order to select the proper readers, Nietzsche writes in a
way that prevents the simpleminded from understanding. Like Plato,
who feared casting his words "as a prey to the envy and stupidity of the
public" (344c), Nietzsche recognizes that some of his "highest insights
must—and should—soimd like foUies and sometimes like crimes when
they are heard without permission by those who are not predisposed
and predestined for them"( BGE 232).
Because of the danger of having one's real insights misunderstood,
claims Nietzsche, "whatever is profound loves masks" {BGE 240). Not
ordy do the profoimd feel the need to conceal themselves with masks of
sorts, they cannot help but do so, since the commonly shallow interpreta
tions of Iheir work offered by others mask their insights. In the face of
such shallow interpretation, states Nietzsche, "one does well to grant
them from the outset some leeway and romping place for misunder
standing"( BGE 230). Nietzsche believes it to be useful to allow, through
one's manner of writing, for the possibihty of a basically harmless mis
interpretation. In her article "Nietzsche's View of Philosophical Style,"
Kathleen Higgins points out that for Nietzsche, the problem with
rmivocal discourse, such as writing, for the coiiununication of philos
ophy is that it employs universal terms yet attempts to communicate
individual insights. Because words by their very nature are incapable of
reflecting the uniqueness of the particular experience which their writer
attempts to convey, they are in a certain sense inadequate. "Words and
consciousness are," she writes, "therefore only superficially related to
the mental life of the individual" (69). Nietzsche does not conclude from
this, however, that writing is worthless. "For Nietzsche, the question is
not whether one should speak [of one's unique experiences], but rather
how one should speak of them"( 71).
The mode of writing philosophy carmot, however, be absolutely
defined for Nietzsche. As we have seen, a style is good which commuru-
cates to its reader the proper state. Nietzsche sheds light on what a
proper form of discourse, capable of doing justice to individual human
experience, might be like in Human,A ll-Too-Human:
Private conversation is the perfect conversation, because every
thing that one person says receives its particular coloring, its tone,
and its accompanying gestures out of strict consideration for the other
person engaged in the conversation. . . . But how is it when there
are two or three or even more persons conversing with one? Con
versation then necessarily loses something of its individualising
40 Nathan Andersen
subtlety, different considerations thwart and neutralize each other.
(As cited in Higgins 72)
The perfect form of communication must pay attention to individual
izing subtleties. This view is similar to that which Plato has Socrates
express in Alcibiades I. Alcibiades, who plans to counsel the Assembly at
Athens, tells Socrates that he is afraid he wiU be unable to persuade him.
Socrates tells him, however, to imagine that he were the people in the
Assembly. Even there, he would have to persuade each man singly
(137). In fact, it seems clear from Socrates' practice that he believed it
necessary to persuade each man of his errors on his own terms. Yet how
is such individualization possible in writing?
For Nietzsche, such individualization requires both the right kind
of reader and the right kind of writer. He, Nietzsche, who is both "a
decadent" and "a beginning"( EH 678), who has gone through a long
period of sickness and suffering and is beginning to convalesce (cf.
Preface to The Gay Science), is the perfect writer. The perfect reader must
have "the most delicate fingers as well as the bravest fists" (EH 720).
Nietzsche's writing does not allow the proper reader to become compla
cent. Nietzsche writes: "A single word from me drives all his bad
instincts into a man's face" (720). In reading Nietzsche we read about
ourselves. Our responses to Nietzsche's words—which are often
intended to offend—tell us more about our own prejudices than about
Nietzsche. While a philosophical treatise might seduce its reader into
believing that knowledge of a problem is sufficient, Nietzsche's writing
is concerned with self-knowledge—which demands action.
III. The Philosophical Task
Both Nietzsche and Plato are concerned, not with instruction or
indoctrination, but with teaching their (proper) readers to live the life of
the philosopher by seeking self-knowledge. In the Phaedrus, Socrates
attempts to do this with the yovmg Phaedrus by persuading him to be a
lover of wisdom rather than sitnply a lover of words, while in Thus Spake
Zarathustra, Nietzsche recounts a narrative of Zarathustra's attempts to
find his children by teaching men the Overman and the eternal reciuxence.
In the Phaedrus, Socrates indicates to Phaedrus ways in which
rhetoric can be rehabilitated. He speaks of a true rhetoric which, unlike
the rhetoric of Lysias that Phaedrus admires, demands more than skiU at
the art of persuasion, a rhetoric that demands that the rhetorician actually
Nietzsche and Plato 41
grasp the truth of that about which she speaks. To grasp the truth, the soul
of the true rhetorician must be in harmony; while it is guided by reason, it
is impelled to seek the truth by an erotic desire.^
As Plato attempts to show how rhetoric might be redeemed from
its fallen state, he also shows how the redemption of Phaedrus, the lover
of rhetoric, can take place. In fact, since for Plato true philosophy cannot
simply convey knowledge, but must involve education of the soul, to
talk philosophically about the redemption of rhetoric and to redeem the
rhetorician are essentially the same thing. Socrates uses his own rhetoric
strategically in order to teach Phaedrus of his (Phaedrus's) need for
redemption, his need to practice philosophy. Socrates does not simply
tell Phaedrus that rhetoric is a waste of time, but shows him, by giving a
false speech, that the lover of wisdom can deliver better speeches than
the rhetorician. Socrates then proceeds to indicate to Phaedrus why this
is so by recounting a myth of the soul and of its ability to recollect
beauty.
In Thus Spake Zarathustra, we find Zarathustra making several
attempts to teach men. In part I, he goes down to men in the market
place and preaches. In the process he gains disciples. He recognizes,
however, that to the extent that his disciples see him as master, they wUl
not be able to appropriate what he has taught as their own; that is, they
wUl not become creators of new values, but will rely on the new values
which he teaches, which will subsequently become old. In order to
preclude this, he leaves them and tells them to reject him.
Throughout the rest of the dialogue, we see Zarathustra concerned
with how to teach what he has to teach in such a way that it will be
taken up properly by those who leam. In order to vmderstand Zara-
thustra's teachings, we must be aware of his distress, and observe how
this relates to what he says. Zarathustra, who proclaims the Overman
and is the teacher of eternal recurrence {Zarathustra 332), fears deeply
the necessity of teaching the eternal recurrence. He fears, it seems, the
possibility of misunderstanding. Of Zarathustra, Martin Heidegger
writes, "One who has not previously and does not constantly perceive
^Compare the vivid image of the soul as a chariot in Phaedrus 246a-256e with
Socrates' claim that "heaven sent madness" is superior to "man-made sanity"
(244d). The true art of rhetoric involves both the madness of erotic desire and the
careful scrutiny of dialectic. These allow the rhetorician to both "list the various
natures among his prospective audiences" and "divide things into their kinds
and embrace each individual thing under a single form"( 273d-e).
42 Nathan Andersen
the horror in all the discourses—seemingly arrogant and often ecstati
cally conducted as they are—will never know who Zarathustra is"( 66).
Similarly, one who is not constantly aware of the ignorance that
Socrates insists is essential to self-knowledge can easily be misled
by Socrates' seemingly arrogant and flowery proclamations about love,
the immortality of the soul and recollection—and wiU never discover who
Socrates is. To imderstand Nietzsche's and Plato's work without attrib
uting false positions to them, one must be capable of feeling the mood out
of which their work was engendered.
Both Socrates and Zarathustra (and consequently Plato and
Nietzsche) want to teach, not to indoctrinate, but to educate the souls
of those whom they teach. Yet both see the impossibility of straight
forward conununicahon in teaching the way they would like. In order to
avoid this, Plato writes dialogues and Nietzsche writes aphorisms (or, in
the case of Zarathustra, an aphoristic narrative). According to Arthur
Krentz, Plato's dialogues "appear designed to lead an interpreter to
think through a philosophical issue for himself, rather than to provide
him with an explicit account of Plato's doctrines" (34). Similarly, in
aphorism 188 of Human, All-Too-Human, Nietzsche claims that modem
thinkers write badly because they tell us not only their thoughts, but
also the thinking of their thoughts. Referring to Goethe, but offering
remarks which would apply equally well to his own writings, Nietzsche
says that his writings do not solve problems, but rather point to trouble
spots—^which must then be analyzed by the reader.
Plato's and Nietzsche's very methods of writing also seem to allow
for the possibility of uncareful readings. Because Plato's own beliefs are
never explicitly given in the dialogues, often scholars attempt to re
create dogmatic systems and call them Platonic doctrines. Often such
systems are problematic, such as the theory of the forms which,
although generally held to be untenable, is nevertheless consistently
attributed to Plato. Also, because Nietzsche writes aphoristically, his
writings on any given subject are often disjointed and at times even
contradictory. It is often difficult to make sense of what he really means.
This difficulty sometimes leads to readings based on isolated texts that
sometimes appear to indicate that Nietzsche's views are nihilistic.
Neither of these characterizations is accurate, however. Both writers
attempt by their very manner of writing to avoid the claim to any
absolute positive (or negative) doctrine.
Nietzsche and Plato 43
Works Cited
Babich, Babette E. "On Nietzsche's Conciimity: An Analysis of Style."
Nietzsche-Studien 19 (1990): 59-80.
Curran, Jane V. "The Rhetorical Technique of Plato's Phaedrus."
Philosophy and Rhetoric 19.1 (1986): 66-72.
Freydberg, Bernard. "Nietzsche's Socratic Task in 'Vom Nutzen und
Nachteil der Historie fiir das Leben.'" Man and World 18 (1985):
317-24.
Griswold, Charles L., Jr. Self-Knoioledge in Plato's Phaedrus. New Haven:
Yale UP,1 986.
Heidegger, Martin. "Who Is Nietzsche's Zarathustra?" Trans. Bemd
Magus. The New Nietzsche: Contemporary Styles of Interpretation.
Ed. David B. Allison. New York: Dell, 1977.
Higgins, Kathleen. "Nietzsche's View of Philosophical Style."
International Studies in Philosophy 18 (1986): 67-81.
Hyland, Drew. "Why Plato Wrote Dialogues." Philosophy and Rhetoric 1
(1968): 38-50.
Kofman, Sarah. "Nietzsche's Socrates: 'Who' Is Socrates?" Trans.
Madeleine Dobie. Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 15.2 (1991):
7-29.
Krentz, Arthur A. "Dramatic Form and Philosophical Content in Plato's
Dialogues." Philosophy and Literature 7( 1983): 32-47.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Basic Writings of Nietzsche. Trans. Walter
Kaufmarm. New York: Modem Library, 1968.
—.B eyond Good and Evil. Nietzsche, Basic Writings. 181-435
—.E cce Homo. Nietzsche, Basic Writings. 657-800.
—. The Gay Science. Trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random
House. 1976.
—. Human-AlTToo-Human. Trans. R. J. Hollingdale. New York:
Cambridge UP,1 986.
—. Thus Spake Zarathustra. The Portable Nietzsche. Trans. Walter
Kaufmann. New York: Viking, 1968.103-439.
Plato. Alcibiades I. Trans. W. R. M. Lamb. The Loeb Classical Library, Plato
VIII. Ed. E. Capps, T. E. Page, and W. H. D. Rouse. London:
WUliam Heinemann,1 986.
—.A pology. Trans. G. M. A. Gmbe. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
—. Epistle VII. Trans. Rev. R. G. Bury. The Loeb Classical Library.
Cambridge: Harvard UP,1 966.
—. Phaedrus. Trans. R. Hackforth. New York: Press Syndicate of the
University of Cambridge, 1989.
44 Nathan Andersen
Risser, James." Reading Nietzsche." Man and World 23( 1990): 361-73.
Tejera, Victorino. Nietzsche and Greek Thought. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff,
1987.
Vincenzo, Joseph. "Socrates and Rhetoric: The Problem of Nietzsche's
Socrates." Philosophy and Rhetoric 25.2( 1992): 162-82.