Ergo
AN OPEN ACCESS
JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on
the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer
SCOTT HILL
Auburn University
I defend a solution to the puzzle of petitionary prayer based on some ideas of Aqui-
nas, Gregory the Great, and contemporary desert theorists. I then address a series of
objections. Along the way broader issues about the nature of desert, what is required
for an action to have a point, and what is required for a puzzle to have a solution are
discussed.
1. The Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer
Suppose you pray for rain. If it is best for it to rain, God will make it happen even
without your prayer. If it is not, God will keep it from raining even if you pray.
Either way it doesn’t change what God will do. This makes your prayer seem
pointless.
2. A Desertist Solution
Aquinas, quoting Gregory the Great, writes,
we pray not that we may change the Divine disposition, but . . . . “that
by asking, men may deserve to receive what Almighty God from eternity
has disposed to give.”1
This suggests a principle linking asking to desert:
AD: If S asks for x from y, then S deserves to get x from y in virtue of
asking.
1. Sum II- II, Q. 83.
Contact: Scott Hill <hillscottandrew@gmail.com>
http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/ergo.12405314.0005.015 407
408 • Scott Hill
AD is problematic. There are cases in which someone asks for something but
fails to deserve it. Suppose you purchase a beer and a stranger asks out of the
blue if he can have it. Or suppose a student turns in a bad paper and asks for an
A. The stranger and student do not deserve what they asked for. There are also
cases in which someone asks for something and deserves what was asked for
but not in virtue of asking. Suppose you spill a stranger’s beer and he asks you
to replace it. Or suppose another student, who turned in a good paper, asks for
an A. The stranger deserves a beer from you and the student deserves an A. But
not in virtue of asking.
Desert theorists hold that fully articulated desert statements include infor-
mation about the strength of desert.2 In the cases above, the subjects deserve
what they asked for to only a minuscule degree in virtue of asking. The stranger
who asks for your beer out of the blue and the student who wrote a bad paper
but asks for an A deserve what they asked for but only to a very small degree.
The stranger whose beer you spill and the student who writes a very good paper
already deserve what they asked for in virtue of other things. But asking contrib-
utes a minuscule amount to the degree to which they deserve the relevant goods.
Let’s introduce a Rossian distinction between overall desert and prima facie
desert. The stranger who asks for your beer and the student who wrote a bad
paper do not overall deserve what they asked for. But they have a minuscule
amount of prima facie desert for what they asked for. The stranger whose beer
you spilled and the student who wrote a good paper overall deserve what they
ask for independently of asking. But asking adds a minuscule amount of prima
facie desert for what they ask for. Also, asking in an insincere, insulting, ungrate-
ful, or demanding way is not a basis for desert. Consider:
AD*: If S asks for x from y in a respectful, grateful, appreciative, and
non- demanding way, then S prima facie deserves to get x to a minuscule
degree from y in virtue of asking.
Desert theorists accept
World: A world at which S receives and overall deserves x is better than
an otherwise similar world at which S receives but does not overall de-
serve x.3
Let’s say that S overall deserves x from y partly in virtue of F if and only if
three conditions obtain. First, S overall deserves x from y. Second, S prima facie
2. See Feldman (2016) and McLeod (2013).
3. See Ross (1930: 138), Brandt (1961: 123), Feldman (2004: 194– 197), and Skow (2012: 235–
236).
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer • 409
deserves x from y in virtue of F. Third, if S did not prima facie deserve x from y
in virtue of F, then S would not overall deserve x from y. Consider:
Petition: A non-t rivial number of petitionary prayers are such that the
praying subject overall deserves what God has already decided to give
that subject partly in virtue of asking.
Given AD*, petitionary prayers make a minuscule contribution to prima facie
desert. So given God’s providence, we may suppose that Petition is true and on a
non- trivial number of occasions we overall deserve what God will give us partly
in virtue of offering petitionary prayers. Given World, receiving from God what
we overall deserve is better than receiving from God what we merely prima facie
deserve. So petitionary prayers are not pointless.
3. Objections and Replies
First Objection: If only a non- trivial number of prayers generate overall desert,
then the remaining prayers will be pointless.
Reply: An action can have a point even if the point of the action remains unful-
filled. Suppose you have a hedon generating machine. Sometimes pressing the but-
ton on the machine will give your friend a hedon. Other times pressing the button
will do nothing. Suppose it generates a hedon 4 out of every 10 times it is activated.
Now imagine that you press the button on the machine and it does nothing. Your
action was not pointless. The point of pressing the button was to give your friend a
hedon. You never know when the machine will generate a hedon and when it will
do nothing. So it makes sense to activate it even in cases in which, unbeknownst to
you, the machine will do nothing. We are often in the dark about our level of desert
(Feldman 1995). Given Petition, it makes sense to offer petitionary prayers just as it
makes sense to press the button on the hedon generating machine.
Second Objection: One can generate overall desert without offering petition-
ary prayers.
Reply: An action is not pointless merely in virtue of the fact that it achieves a
good that could have been achieved in some other way. Suppose I can save your
life by pressing either Button A or Button B. Suppose I press Button B. My action
was not pointless. The point was to save your life. It does not matter that I could
have saved you by pressing a different button. Similarly, there are many ways to
achieve the receipt of overall deserved goods. But praying is one way to achieve
it. The fact that we could have achieved the relevant good in other ways does
not make it any more pointless than the fact that I could have saved your life by
pressing Button A makes pressing Button B pointless.
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
410 • Scott Hill
Third Objection: Suppose an evil person asks for forgiveness. She is so far
from overall deserving forgiveness that asking does not generate desert. Never-
theless, her prayer has a point.
Reply: An action can have a point even if other instances of that action have
a different point. The point of her prayer is not to generate overall desert. But an
alternative point is easy to find. Repentance is good. Praying for forgiveness is
one way to begin to repent. That is why it makes sense for the evil person to pray
for forgiveness even though she will not overall deserve it after praying. Dif-
ferent petitionary prayers have different points. The fact that the point of some
prayers is to begin to achieve repentance rather than to generate overall desert is
a virtue of the solution and not a demerit.
Fourth Objection: Asking does not improve things for the praying subject.
God will give them the relevant good whether they ask or not.
Reply: An action can have a point even if that action is of no benefit to subject
performing the action. Suppose someone gives a large amount of money to UNI-
CEF. Making such a large donation causes this person so much hardship that her
life is overall worse. But her action was not pointless.
Fifth Objection: People pray in order to bring about the outcome they desire.
If they were to discover that the purpose of petitionary prayer is to aid in their
achievement of overall desert they would stop praying.
Reply: An action can have a point even if the agent of that action would not
have performed it if they had known its point. We started out with the worry that
petitionary prayer is pointless. If I am told that I have sketched a way in which
such prayer can have a point, but that upon discovering its point people would
stop praying, then I will say that I have nevertheless done my job. For people do
not believe my sketch. They continue to pray. And in doing so they contribute to
the value of the world. Furthermore, it is not clear that people would stop pray-
ing if they discovered that one of the purposes of petitionary prayer is to achieve
overall desert. This is something Aquinas and Gregory the Great believed. But
nevertheless they offered such prayers.
Sixth Objection: Petition is false. It would require an extraordinary coinci-
dence for history to line up in such a way that Petition is true. In light of this,
it is hard to see how petitionary prayer makes much of a difference in typical
cases. It would only make a difference on the rarest of occasion and so typically
be pointless.
Reply: Petition does not require a coincidence. Consider the Calvin/Aquinas
view that every contingent proposition gets its truth- value by divine decree. So
God can decree that free creatures pray at exactly the times required to make Pe-
tition true. Consider Molinism. There are infinitely many worlds God could cre-
ate. It is plausible that at some of these worlds there will be strange and unusual
patterns that add to the value of the world. In some cases the unusual patterns
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer • 411
will cause petitionary prayers to generate desert with non-t rivial frequency.
Equipped with knowledge of counterfactuals about indeterministic processes
such as free decisions and quantum phenomena, God knows how He needs to
set up the initial conditions of the world and/or when He needs to intervene in
order make Petition true. Consider Simple Foreknowledge and Open Theism
views. On these theories of providence, God might not be able to guarantee that
Petition is true. But He can use knowledge of the probabilities of free decisions
and quantum phenomena to ensure that Petition is probably true. In this way
God can ensure that prayers do make a difference in many typical cases.
Seventh Objection: What needs defense is the claim that the kind of prayers
encouraged by a given religious tradition (with their prescribed frequency and
objects) have a point. Focusing too literally on “having a point” allows for a kind
of solution, but one that might not address the real problem.
Reply: It is important to look at things from God’s perspective. Regarding
getting the right frequency of prayers: Pick any frequency of prayers that any
religious tradition takes to have a point. God can meticulously arrange history,
in the way I outline in reply to the previous objection about Petition, so that such
prayers generate overall desert often enough that such prayers have a point.
Regarding getting the right objects of prayer: Some legitimate objects of prayer
will likely not be included in my solution such as the prayer discussed in re-
ply to objection three by the person undeserving of forgiveness, as well as non-
petitionary prayers of thanks for what God has done or celebrations of God’s
excellence. But as I suggested above, it is a virtue of my solution that it does
not entail that there is only one point to petitionary prayers and that different
prayers have different points.
Eighth Objection: My solution does not generate the right frequency of
prayers. Either the potential value of praying is so great that you should always
be praying, as opposed to doing anything else, or it is so low that you should
rarely do it.
Reply: It is not clear to me why this would be true. First, a world that consisted
of nothing but people asking God for things would miss out on the wide variety
of other kinds of value that our world is teeming with. That would make such a
world much worse than ours. It seems that a better world would have petitionary
prayers as one of many valuable activities creatures engage in. Second, we don’t
think that other activities of great value should be done to the exclusion of every-
thing else. It might be of great value to do research in quantum physics. But no one
thinks that is the only activity anyone should be furthering. We think that smiling
at one’s neighbor may be of only a little value. But it is still worth doing.
Ninth Objection: World is incompatible with Christianity. We did not do any-
thing to deserve forgiveness from God. And the world would not have been bet-
ter if God had given us forgiveness because we deserved it.
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
412 • Scott Hill
Reply: Desert theorists have shown that one can deserve something without
having done anything to deserve it (Feldman 1995). In the case of Christianity,
we deserve forgiveness from God. But not because of what we have done. In-
stead, it is because of what Christ has done for us. If God were to withhold for-
giveness from us, He would be depriving us of something we deserve in virtue
of Christ’s life, death, and resurrection.
Tenth Objection: According to my solution, an already deserving petitioner
can become more deserving by asking. But such a petitioner has already done all
that is needed to become sufficiently deserving. It may not be “pointless” to add
some small degree of desert. But it is insignificant.
Reply: The distinction between prima facie and overall desert is analogous to
Ross’s distinction between prima facie and overall rightness. For Ross, adding
a minuscule amount of prima facie rightness might not count for much on its
own. But sometimes it tips the balance so that an act becomes overall right. And
that is significant. Similarly, merely adding a minuscule amount of prima facie
desert may not be significant. But, given Petition, it often pushes subjects over
the edge from merely prima facie deserving something to overall deserving it.
That is significant.
Eleventh Objection: How is my solution different from Cohoe’s (2014)?
Reply: Cohoe (2014: 6) argues that the puzzle is really a puzzle for any creature-
ly action if God exists. I argue that whether God exists or not, reasons sometimes
given for thinking petitionary prayer is pointless imply (implausibly) that other
actions are pointless. Cohoe (2014: 13) argues that there are goods God can achieve
only through petitionary prayers. I allow that God could have achieved the rel-
evant goods in other ways. Cohoe argues that “if in every case the good brought
about as a result of petitionary prayer would have been brought about in some
similar manner in any case, one might doubt the efficacy of petitionary prayer”
(2014: 24) and that “some goods are counterfactually dependent on prayer” (2014:
27). I allow that petitionary prayer has a point even if God would always bring
about the relevant goods anyway. Cohoe’s solution is articulated within Aquinas’s
framework and adopts Aquinas’s views about value, causation, God’s power, and
other metaphysical issues. My solution does not depend on any particular theolog-
ical or metaphysical position. It is compatible with any theory of God’s providence
and relies on common assumptions shared by desert theorists. In short, Cohoe’s
solution depends on many plausible but controversial assumptions. My solution
depends on only one controversial assumption—A D*. Every other feature of the
solution is built out of widely shared theological and moral assumptions.
Twelfth Objection: According to Howard-S nyder and Howard- Snyder,
we cannot petition him while thinking that our words won’t make any
difference to whether he does what we ask. That’s because, in general,
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer • 413
our words do not constitute the speech act of petitioning if we think that
our words won’t make any difference to whether the petitioned does
what we ask. Therefore, no matter what words we use, and even if they
would typically be used to perform a speech act of petitioning, they do
not constitute an act of petitioning God if we think that they won’t make
any difference to what God does. It behooves us, therefore, not to accept
[that prayers do not change what God will do] if we wish to engage in the
practice of petitionary prayer. (2010: 46)
Reply: Consider two questions. First, there is the question of whether the
common activity of petitionary prayer is correctly classified as a petition. Sec-
ond, there is the question of whether the common activity of petitionary prayer
has a point. The first question is certainly interesting. It is worth considering
how exactly to classify petitionary prayer and how it relates to typical petitions.
But it strikes me that the second question is much more interesting. I am more
interested in knowing whether the common activity of petitionary prayer has a
point than I am in knowing whether ‘petition’ is a misnomer for that activity.
And it is the second question that my solution is intended to answer.
Thirteenth Objection: According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Aquinas “seems to deny that petitionary prayers are effective, so it would not
solve the problem” (Davidson 2012). Stump writes,
Why should prayers be included in God’s plan as causes of certain ef-
fects? And what sense is there in the notion that a perfect and unchange-
able God, who disposes and plans everything, fulfills men’s prayers ask-
ing him to do one thing or another? Thomas’s argument, I think, gives no
help with these questions. (1979: 86)
Reply: Petitionary prayers are effective and should be included in God’s plan
because they generate desert. Aquinas adds that they generate ‘happiness’, ‘con-
fidence’, ‘honor’ and cause us to ‘recognize in Him the Author of our goods’.4
God fulfills our prayers in the sense that we ask Him for goods and He provides
them.
Fourteenth Objection: Most scholars who work on this topic are concerned
that petitionary prayer would prove not to be efficacious in terms of adding any-
thing to bringing about what the petitioner prays for. I concede the very position
that most solutions try to preserve.
Reply: A solution to a puzzle can contribute to the literature even if it denies
something that most other solutions attempt to preserve. Most authors seek to
4. Sum II- II, Q. 83.
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
414 • Scott Hill
resolve the Sorites Paradox in a way that preserves the assumption that there is no
precise cut off between a mere collection of pebbles and a heap. But Williamson
(1994), Sorensen (2001), and Rescher (2009) offer solutions that abandon this as-
sumption. Most authors seek to resolve puzzles about omnipotence in a way that
preserves God’s omnipotence. But Geach (1973), Sobel (2004), Hill (2014), Morris-
ton (2002), and Nagasawa (2008) offer solutions that abandon omnipotence.
Fifteenth Objection: A solution can reject tenets other solutions retain, but how
far am I going in suggesting petitionary prayer does not add anything. Do I re-
ally want to deny that in some cases the prayer itself adds something to what
ends up being brought about?
Reply: It is not that my solution entails the denial of the claim that petitionary
prayer sometimes contributes to bringing about what is requested. It is instead
that my solution does not rely on that claim. There is a sharp divide in the litera-
ture between those who think it is obvious that prayer could never contribute to
bringing about an outcome and those who are convinced that it could. I think it
is a virtue of my solution that it is compatible with either view.
Sixteenth Objection: Part of the interest of this paper is supposed to be histori-
cal. It would be surprising if desert were an important part of Aquinas’s solution
since, as we have seen, contemporary critics of Aquinas ignore that aspect of his
account. However, I do not offer any serious engagement with Aquinas’s texts or
thought. Aquinas, for instance, often quotes a variety of authorities only to reject
or recast what the authorities say. I have done nothing to show that the desert
solution is really the heart of Aquinas’ approach to petitionary prayer. The fact
that he quotes Gregory the Great on this matter does not alone show that this
was the heart of his own views.
Reply: Consider the main passage in which Aquinas’s response to the puzzle
of petitionary prayer occurs:
In order to throw light on this question we must consider that Divine
providence disposes not only what effects shall take place, but also from
what causes and in what order these effects shall proceed. Now among
other causes human acts are the causes of certain effects. Wherefore it
must be that men do certain actions not that thereby they may change
the Divine disposition, but that by those actions they may achieve certain
effects according to the order of the Divine disposition: and the same is to
be said of natural causes. And so is it with regard to prayer. For we pray
not that we may change the Divine disposition, but that we may impe-
trate that which God has disposed to be fulfilled by our prayers in other
words “that by asking, men may deserve to receive what Almighty God
from eternity has disposed to give,” as Gregory says (Dial. i, 8). (Sum II-
II, Q. 83)
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer • 415
Aquinas then goes on to offer short replies to more specific reasons for think-
ing petitionary prayer is pointless. He adds that such prayer reminds us “of the
necessity of having recourse to God’s help” and produces “confidence”, “happi-
ness”, and “honor” (Sum II-I I, Q. 83).
So Aquinas suggests that God wants our prayers to be parts of some of the
processes by which He brings about various goods. Aquinas then gives reasons
why God might want this to happen. In the main passage in which Aquinas
gives his solution, he cites only one reason why God would have this preference-
asking generates desert. In briefer responses to other variants of the objection,
Aquinas says petitionary prayer achieves various other good things. It is clear
that Aquinas is not quoting Gregory the Great to refute him or to set him aside.
Generating desert is not the only purpose of petitionary prayer for Aquinas. But
it is a central purpose.
I would like to highlight one other issue of historical interest. Compare Aqui-
nas’s discussion of petitionary prayer with a similar discussion in the Xunzi.
Although he never discusses desert, Xunzi advocates a view that is in broad
outline like Aquinas’s:
One performs the rain sacrifice and it rains. Why? I say: There is no spe-
cial reason why. It is the same as when one does not perform the rain
sacrifice and it rains anyway. When the sun and moon suffer eclipse, one
tries to save them. When Heaven sends drought, one performs the rain
sacrifice. One performs divination and only then decides on important
affairs. But this is not for the sake of getting what one seeks, but rather to
give things proper form. Thus, the gentleman looks upon this as proper
form, but the common people look upon it as connecting with spirits.
(Xunzi 2001: 263)
For Xunzi, performing the rain ritual does not change whether Heaven provides
rain. But it still has a point. The point is connected to Xunzi’s ideas about the
cultivation of gentlemen and the utilitarian value of rituals in ordering society.
Aquinas suggests that although petitionary prayer does not change what God
will do, it still yields various goods including the achievement of desert, as well
as the cultivation of confidence, happiness, and honor. Similarly, Xunzi suggests
that the relevant rituals do not change what Heaven will do, but they still cul-
tivate gentlemen, and bring order to society. While differing in the particulars
about which goods are achieved through prayer or ritual, the broad strategy is
the same. Much of what I’ve said in reply to objections to Aquinas’s approach
regarding desert can be extended to Xunzi’s approach to the value of ritual.
Seventeenth Objection: Why believe asking generates desert?
Reply: My first argument is that in general effort is a desert base. Asking is
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
416 • Scott Hill
one way of exerting effort. So asking is a desert base. The claim that effort gener-
ates desert is a common assumption in work on desert and work on distributive
justice. As McLeod (2002) puts it:
Suppose we are asked to draw up a list of the bases for desert—t hat is,
a catalogue of the sorts of things such that having any of them would
make a subject deserving. What would go on the list, and how would
each entry be justified? We might agree that effort, for example, is a basis
for deserving reward or success, but we might be less sure about whether
need, for instance, is a basis for deserving medical care, or whether moral
worth is a basis for deserving happiness.
As Feldman puts it in the context of his account of the morality of abortion:
those who appeal to an alleged right to life often have a hard time ex-
plaining the basis for this right. What justifies the claim that a certain
individual has this right . . . ? My view, on the other hand, is based on
concepts already familiar from our thought about justice. Other things
being equal, if an individual puts more into something, he or she de-
serves more out of it. (1992: 206)
Rawls, on the other hand, denies that effort is a desert base:
It seems to be one of the fixed points of our considered moral judgments
that no one deserves his place in the distribution of natural endowments,
any more than one deserves one’s initial starting place in society. The
assertion that a man deserves the superior character that enables him to
make the effort to cultivate his abilities is equally problematical; for his
character depends in large measure upon fortunate family and social cir-
cumstances for which he can claim no credit. The notion of desert seems
not to apply in these cases. (1971: 104)
Rawls’s argument depends on the principle that one has a desert base only if
one deserves that desert base. But suppose I spill your beer. You deserve a beer
from me in virtue of my having spilled it. But you certainly didn’t deserve for me
to spill your beer. You can’t claim credit for my clumsiness. The credit is mine.
So Rawls’s principle is false. Furthermore, others have pointed out that Rawls’s
principle leads to complete skepticism about desert (Feldman 2016: 190–1 95;
Sher 1979; Zaitchik 1977). It implies that no one deserves anything since what-
ever anyone deserves may be traced back to either a putative desert base that
they can’t claim credit for or an infinite regress. So Rawls’s argument against the
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
Aquinas and Gregory the Great on the Puzzle of Petitionary Prayer • 417
view that effort generates desert is unsound. Effort is a desert base. Petitionary
prayer requires effort. Thus, petitionary prayer is a desert base.
My second argument is that the hypothesis that asking generates desert
yields a gain in explanatory power. It allows for a simple and elegant solution
to the puzzle of petitionary prayer without appealing to any other controversial
theological or moral assumptions. If a hypothesis yields a gain in explanatory
power, that is a reason to believe it. So one should believe that asking gener-
ates desert. The claim that a gain in explanatory power is a reason to believe a
hypothesis is a common assumption in metaphysics. Take Lewis’s (1986) modal
realism, for example. No one has the intuition that there are concrete possible
worlds. Indeed, many have the intuition that there are no such worlds. But posit-
ing them yields a gain in explanatory power. That is a reason to believe in them.
Similarly, a gain in explanatory power is a reason to believe asking generates
desert.
Acknowledgements
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Lynne Baker who died unexpectedly
on Christmas Eve 2017. For comments and discussion I thank Lynne Baker, Maya
Eddon, Ed Ferrier, Heidi Furey, Cameron Gibbs, Pete Graham, Bob Gruber, Scott
Jackson, Dennis Kavlakoglu, Hilary Kornblith, Chris Meacham, Luis Oliviera,
Kristian Olsen, Kenny Pearce, Ben Rancourt, Julie Rose, Miles Tucker, Aaron
Washington, Hayley Webster and audiences at Oxford University’s Ian Ramsey
Center Special Divine Action Conference in San Antonio and the Department of
Philosophy at the University of Massachusetts’ Graduate Student Colloquium.
Special thanks to Fred Feldman and many anonymous referees.
References
Aquinas, Thomas (1947). The Summa Theologica. Fathers of the English Dominican Prov-
ince (Trans.). Benziger Brothers.
Brandt, Richard (1961). Value and Obligation: Systematic Readings in Ethics. Harcourt, Brace
& World.
Cohoe, Caleb (2014). God, Causality, and Petitionary Prayer. Faith and Philosophy, 31(1),
24– 35. https://doi.org/10.5840/faithphil201312302
Davidson, Scott (2012). Petitionary Prayer. In Edward N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2012 ed.). Retrieved from http://plato.stanford.edu/ar-
chives/fall2012/entries/petitionary- prayer/
Feldman, Fred (1992). Confrontations with the Reaper: A Philosophical Study of the Nature
and Value of Death. Oxford University Press.
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018
418 • Scott Hill
Feldman, Fred (1995). Desert: Reconsideration of Some Received Wisdom. Mind,
104(413), 63– 77. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/104.413.63
Feldman, Fred (2004). Pleasure and the Good Life: Concerning the Nature, Varieties and Plausi-
bility of Hedonism. Clarendon Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/019926516X.001.0001
Feldman, Fred (2016). Distributive Justice: Getting What We Deserve From Our Country.
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198782988.001.0001
Flint, Thomas (1998). Divine Providence: The Molinist Account. Cornell University Press.
Geach, Peter (1973). Omnipotence. Philosophy, 48(183), 7– 20. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0031819100060381
Hill, Scott (2014). Giving up Omnipotence. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 44(1), 97– 117.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00455091.2014.914289
Howard-S nyder, Daniel and Frances Howard- Snyder (2010). The Puzzle of Petitionary
Prayer. European Journal for Philosophy of Religion, 2(2), 43– 68. https://doi.org/10.24204/
ejpr.v2i2.367
Lewis, David (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford University Press.
McLeod, Owen (2013). Desert. In Edward N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Winter 2013 ed.). Retrieved from http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
win2013/entries/desert/
Morriston, Wes (2002). Omnipotence and the Power to Choose: A Reply to Wielenberg.
Faith and Philosophy, 19(3), 358– 567. https://doi.org/10.5840/faithphil200219329
Nagasawa, Yujin (2008). God and Phenomenal Consciousness: A Novel Approach to Knowledge
Arguments. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511498961
Rescher, Nicholas (2009). Unknowability: An Enquiry Into the Limits of Knowledge. Lexing-
ton Books.
Ross, William D. (1930). The Right and the Good. Oxford University Press.
Sher, George (1979). Effort, Ability, and Personal Desert. Philosophy and Public Affairs,
8(4), 361– 376.
Skow, Bradford (2012). How to Adjust Utility for Desert. Australasian Journal of Philoso-
phy, 90(2), 235– 257. https://doi.org/10.1080/00048402.2011.572079
Sobel, Jordan H. (2004). Logic and Theism: Arguments for and Against Beliefs in God. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Sorensen, Roy (2001). Vagueness and Contradiction. Oxford University Press.
Stump, Eleonore (1979). Petitionary Prayer. American Philosophical Quarterly, 16(2), 81–9 1.
Williamson, Timothy (1994). Vagueness. Routledge.
Xunzi (2001). Xunzi. In Philip Ivanhoe and Bryan Van Norden (Eds.), Readings in Classical
Chinese Philosophy (247–2 93). Seven Bridges Press.
Zaitchik, Alan (1977). On Deserving to Deserve. Philosophy and Public Affairs, 6(4), 370–
388.
Ergo • vol. 5, no. 15 • 2018