Aporia vol. 20 no. 1—2010
Moore’s Paradox: Use, Implicature, and Cause
Monica BarBir
An assertion is a kind of utterance that has two distinguishing fea-
tures: the speaker has evidence for and believes that which she
is asserting (i.e., P).1 The relationship between assertions and
beliefs in the first-person assertive context poses a unique problem. The
first-person assertive context is one in which a person asserts something
about himself at the present moment. For example, suppose Tom makes
the following assertion: “I believe that it is not raining, but as a matter of
fact it is.” Wittgenstein claims that Tom’s assertion is absurd because the
utterance of belief in P is used like the assertion P. If the utterance of belief
is used like an assertion, then it is used like “It is not raining, but as a mat-
ter of fact it is.” If this analysis is correct, then Tom’s assertion is absurd
because it is plainly contradictory.
However, an utterance of belief in P is not always used like the asser-
tion P. Rather, G. E. Moore’s explanation is more plausible: the person
who makes an assertion implies that he believes that which he is asserting.
Under this analysis, Tom would be implying “I believe it is not raining,
but I believe that it is raining.” Accordingly, Tom’s assertion is absurd,
not because his assertion is contradictory, but because his beliefs
are contradictory.
Still, Moore’s implicative relation between assertion and belief overlooks
an important distinction: there are two ways of characterizing implication.
A speaker can either intend to imply belief by making an assertion, or a
speaker can imply belief by making an assertion because she ought to be
following a maxim. My aim here is to adequately characterize the relation
1 For further discussion on the nature of assertions, see Searle’s “The Structure of Illocutionary Acts.”
Monica Barbir is a senior specializing in philosophy with a minor in semiotics at the
University of Toronto. Her interests include logic and the philosophy of language.
16 Monica BarBir
between assertion and belief in order to account for the absurdity in Tom’s
assertion. Section I describes Moore’s Paradox, contrasting the notion of
logical contradiction with that of absurdity. Section II discusses the possibility
of using a statement of belief like an assertion to account for the absur-
dity of Tom’s assertion, and then sheds light on the inadequacies of this
possibility. Section III discusses the possibility of implying a speaker’s belief
with an assertion to account for the absurdity, and develops an implicative
relation that combines Moore’s and Grice’s conceptions of implicature.
Section IV advances the conclusion that a particular kind of implicative
relation between assertion and belief can account for the absurdity of
Tom’s assertion.
I. Moore’s Paradox
Moore’s Paradox arises upon uttering one of two sentences:
(M) “I do not believe it is raining, but as a matter
of fact it is,”
or
(M') “I believe it is not raining, but as a matter
of fact it is.”
To begin, I will explain what I mean by “logical contradiction” and “ab-
surdity.” Both are properties of nonsensical statements. However, a logical
contradiction is nonsensical merely because of the words in the statement,
and an absurdity is nonsensical because its words are uttered in a specific
context (Moore 207). I will focus on a particularly striking difference be-
tween the two: logical contradictions are preserved even if the tense or
grammatical person is changed. In contrast, absurdities are not preserved
if the tense or grammatical person is changed. Suppose Tom utters, “It is
raining and it isn’t raining.” He has uttered a logical contradiction: P and
not-P. Imagine that we change the tense of his utterance: “It was raining
(at time t) and it was not raining (at time t)” [past], or “it will be raining (at
time t) and it will not be raining (at time t)” [future]. Tom will still have
uttered a contradiction, despite the change in tense. Now suppose Tom ut-
ters, “I am walking in the rain and I am not walking in the rain.” Again, he
has uttered a contradiction. Suppose then that we change the grammatical
person referred to by Tom: “You are walking in the rain and you are not
walking in the rain,” or “He is walking in the rain and he is not walking in
the rain.” Tom will still have uttered a contradiction, despite the change
in grammatical person.
Moore’s Paradox: Use, iMPlicatUre, and caUse 17
In contrast, an absurdity, such as the one in (M) and (M'), does not
hold in all tenses and all grammatical persons. Suppose Tom utters (M) in
the past tense: “I did not believe it was raining, but as a matter of fact it
was.” (M) in the past tense is not contradictory. After all, Tom might not
have believed it was raining because his office has no windows, but later
found that it had been raining for several hours. Now suppose Tom utters
(M) in the third-person: “He does not believe it is raining, but as a matter
of fact it is.” (M) in the third-person is not contradictory; Tom could be
standing in the rain and speaking of James, who does not believe that it is
raining because he is underground in a subway train. Hence, (M) and (M')
are problematic only in the first-person assertive context.2
The two assertions (M) and (M') are absurd because they interfere
with a system of norms concerning the relation between assertion and be-
lief. In order to account for this absurdity, we need to answer two questions:
(1) What is the relation between assertion and belief? Is it a use relation (as
argued by Wittgenstein) or an implicative relation (as argued by Moore)?
And (2) which normative system does it violate (i.e., theoretical rationality
or practical rationality)?
First, in order to determine which set of norms (M) and (M') violate,
we need to characterize the relation between assertion and belief. The rela-
tion between assertion and belief can be characterized as a use relation or
an implicative relation. The use relation is a relation in which an utterance of
belief is used like an assertion, or an assertion is used like an utterance
of belief. For instance, the utterance “I believe the apple is red” is used like
the utterance “The apple is red.” The implicative relation is a relation in
which a speaker who makes an assertion implies his belief in something.
For instance, Mary implies with her assertion “I admit that the Red Sox
won,” that the statement “The Red Sox won” is true.
Second, once we know what the relation between assertion and belief
is, we can determine whether (M) and (M') violate theoretical rationality or
practical rationality. Theoretical rationality tracks the truth: it determines
whether a statement is true or not irrespective of context of use. For in-
stance, the following sentence is theoretically irrational: “Women are not
females.” Its irrationality is evident from the words in the proposition. In
contrast, practical rationality determines what a speaker ought to say or do
according to certain norms of action. For example, the following case is
practically irrational according to economic norms: suppose Joe is about to
make an investment. He may choose between (a) that which he knows will
bring in fifty-percent profit, and (b) that which he knows will bring in one-
hundred-percent profit. All other features of the two investment choices
2 Henceforth I will refer to (M) and (M') as set in the first-person assertive context only.
18 Monica BarBir
are the same. He chooses the former. Joe’s choice is clearly irrational in this
particular context. However, if Joe were faced with the same choice, but now
knew that (b) will bring in more profit in the first year, but (a) will bring in
more profit in five years, then his choice (i.e., (a)) would not be irrational.
Practical rationality can only be determined in specific contexts. Only once
we have established what the relation is and to what set of norms it adheres
can we adequately account for the absurdity in (M) and (M').
II. The Use Relation
I will begin this section with a closer look at the use relation. Wittgen-
stein’s view is an exemplar of the use relation. He states, “Moore’s paradox
can be put like this: the expression ‘I believe that this is the case’ is used
like the assertion ‘This is the case’” (162). He nonetheless distinguishes
between asserting “I believe P” and asserting “P”; “I believe P” is a hesitant
assertion, and “P” is a non-hesitant assertion (Wittgenstein 164).3 If assert-
ing “I believe P” were identical to asserting “P,” it would be a redundant
feature of our language. Rather, “I believe P” expresses a different kind of
assertion (i.e., a hesitant assertion), such that the two are different species
of the same genus (i.e., assertion).
With the use relation, we can characterize the absurdity of statements
like (M'). If a statement of belief is used like an assertion, then (M') would
become a contradiction: “It is not raining outside [a hesitant assertion],
and it is raining outside [a non-hesitant assertion].”
According to Wittgenstein’s view, Moore’s Paradox arises because the
utterance “I believe P” is used like an assertion rather than to report a
speaker’s state of mind. “He believes that P” and “You believe that P” are
used to report someone’s state of mind. In contrast, “I believe that P” is
not; it is used like an assertion (Wittgenstein 163). If Wittgenstein is cor-
rect, then the relation between assertion and belief in (M') would be the use
relation, because a statement of belief is used like an assertion (i.e., “I be-
lieve P” is used to assert “P”). Moreover, in Wittgenstein’s view, (M') would
violate theoretical rationality because it would be contradictory based on
the words of the statement alone.
There is one primary problem with the use relation analysis of (M)
and (M'). Although the use relation can explain the absurdity in (M'), it is
unclear how it could explain the absurdity in (M). One could say that “I
don’t believe P” is a hesitant assertion of not-P, such that “I don’t believe
that P” has the same meaning as “I believe not-P.” Accordingly, an utterance
3 Wittgenstein classifies “I believe P” as hesitant. I am introducing the description “non-hesitant”
to classify assertions not of this type.
Moore’s Paradox: Use, iMPlicatUre, and caUse 19
of (M) would become a contradiction: “It is not raining outside [a hesitant
assertion], and it is raining outside [a non-hesitant assertion].” Nonethe-
less, there is a subtle but important distinction between “I don’t believe P”
and “I believe not-P.” The first is not always used to imply a belief of not-P.
Suppose Tom says “I don’t believe it is raining,” and Tim says “I believe it is
not raining.” According to Wittgenstein, the latter uses the statement like
the assertion “It is not raining,” making a hesitant assertion about the state
of the weather. But even if this is correct, the former need not be making
the assertion “It is not raining.” Rather, Tom could be stating that he does
not believe that it is raining, making an assertion about his state of mind.
Perhaps Tom wants to say something along the lines of “I do not believe
it is raining; I know it is.” If Tom is making an assertion about his state of
mind, then “I don’t believe it is raining” would be in the same category as
“he believes it is raining” and “you believe it is raining.” Accordingly, if “I
don’t believe it is raining” is used like “he believes it is raining” and not
like the assertion “It is not raining,” then even assuming Wittgenstein’s
argument is correct, there ought not to arise an absurdity in (M) (compare
Wittgenstein § 2.1).
The use relation analysis is problematic because it cannot be applied
to all assertions of belief in the first-person assertive context, and corre-
spondingly because it cannot explain both of Moore’s paradox statements,
(M) and (M').
III. Moore and Grice
I will now look at Moore’s and Grice’s implicative relation analysis,
discussing how the two analyses can work together to account for the absur-
dity in (M) and (M'). Implication is an aspect of meaning that is neither the
literal meaning of words nor what words logically imply (though these as-
pects of meaning may coincide). Rather, it is the meaning that the speaker
conveys. For instance, suppose that Jim says “It is raining,” and, just down
the street, Sam says “It is raining.” There is no difference between what the
words mean in the two utterances. The difference lies in the implication of
each utterance (Moore 209–10): Jim implies that he believes that it is rain-
ing; Sam implies that he, and not Jim, believes that it is raining. Moore’s
notion of implication (hereafter I) can be summed up as follows:
(I) By asserting P, S implies proposition P.
S implies a proposition with each assertion he makes. This proposi-
tion may or may not correspond to the literal meaning of the words in the
assertion. Additionally, there is the implication of belief:
(I') By asserting P, S implies that S believes P.
20 Monica BarBir
If we apply (I') to (M) (i.e., “I do not believe it is raining, but as a mat-
ter of fact it is”), then there is a contradiction between a part of what one
directly asserts (that one does not believe it is raining) and a proposition
which is implied by the assertion “but as a matter of fact it is” (that one
believes that it is raining). The assertion (M) is contradictory, because it is
contradictory to believe and not believe something at the same time. If we
apply (I') to (M'), then there is an inconsistency between part of what one
directly asserts (that one believes it is not raining) and a proposition which
is implied by the assertion “but as a matter of fact it is” (that one believes
that it is raining). The assertion (M') is not contradictory the way (M) is,
but rather is inconsistent because it demonstrates a contradiction of beliefs
(that it is and is not raining). Although (M) and (M') are contradictory in
different ways—the beliefs in (M) are contradictory, and, in contrast, the
contents of the beliefs are contradictory in (M')—we can explain both cases
of absurdity using the notion of implication.
Nonetheless, the notion of implication is tricky. Moore makes two
classificatory comments in regards to (I'):
(1) A proposition itself does not imply belief: the
proposition “it is raining” does not imply that I
believe it is raining. “It is raining” ought to be
asserted by someone.
(2) A proposition asserted by S does not imply be-
lief. S may say it is raining and be lying. (210)
Even though Moore does not elaborate further on these classificatory com-
ments, they set the stage for Grice’s notion of implication. (1) distinguishes
what words mean in a linguistic community from what a speaker means
to say, and (2) sheds light on the possibility that an assertion by S, on
its own, does not imply belief. (I') does not state a logical or semantic fact.
Rather, (I') states an empirical fact: “in the immense majority of cases in
which a person says a thing assertively, he does believe the proposition which
his words express” (Moore 210).
In the case of Moore’s implicative relation, (M) violates practical ra-
tionality. We ought to believe P when we make an assertion P, because we
imply belief in P when we assert P. Accordingly, we can recognize cases in
which one does not believe another’s assertion, such as cases of lying.4 Nev-
ertheless, Moore does not give a thorough account of the role of implication
in communication, and this is where Grice’s view can fill in the gap.
In order to define implication, Grice distinguishes two kinds of
meaning (“Meaning” 108–13): natural meaning and non-natural meaning.
4 For discussion on “sincerity conditions” of assertions, see Austin’s “Performative Utterances” and
Searle’s “The Structure of Illocutionary Acts.”
Moore’s Paradox: Use, iMPlicatUre, and caUse 21
Natural meaning is conveyed by a statement such as “those spots mean
chickenpox,” because the statement suggests a relation of cause and effect—
spots are an effect of having chickenpox. Non-natural meaning involves an
agent who intends to communicate meaning through a certain speech act.
For instance, Smith uttered “I can’t get on without my trouble and strife”
intending to communicate that his wife is indispensable.
In light of Grice’s distinction between natural and non-natural mean-
ing, (I') could have natural meaning: the assertion P causes the audience to
think that “the utterer of P believes that P”—so the audience thinking “the
utterer of P believes that P” is just an effect of the assertion P. However,
the notion of natural meaning does not satisfy Moore’s two classificatory
comments. According to Moore’s first classifcatory comment, there ought
to be a speaker asserting P; in contrast, natural meaning is not communi-
cated by a speaker. Natural meaning is not classified as communication
because communication is a normative act; in the example above, it is clear
that the spots are not communicating “chickenpox.” Rather, (I') could have
non-natural meaning: S asserts P intending the audience to recognize that
he believes that P. Non-natural meaning follows a system of norms, and
consequently is characterized as communication. This definition of mean-
ing satisfies both of Moore’s classificatory comments.
Non-natural meaning is not merely that which is suggested. An es-
pecially telling instance of non-natural meaning is given by Grice in his
example of Jones the athlete:
How we are to avoid saying, for example, that “Jones is
tall” is part of what is non-naturally meant by “Jones is an
athlete,” since to tell someone that Jones is an athlete
would tend to make him believe that Jones is tall. Ste-
venson here resorts to invoking linguistic rules, namely
a permissive rule of language that “athletes may be non-
tall.” This amounts to saying that we are not prohibited
by rule from speaking of “nontall athletes.” But why are
we not prohibited? Not because it is not bad grammar, or
is not impolite, and so on, but presumably because it is
not meaningless. (“Meaning” 110)
The Jones example sheds light on the possibility that although an utterance
would tend to make someone believe something, the resulting belief is not
necessarily part of the non-natural meaning of the utterance. The speaker
may have uttered “Jones is an athlete” without intending to make a com-
ment on Jones’s height. Accordingly, Grice grounds non-natural meaning
in intention: an audience can understand what one says in terms of one’s
intentions to produce a response (for instance, a belief) in an audience.
22 Monica BarBir
Accordingly, “S meant something by assertion P” (i.e., that he believes P) is
true if, for some audience A, S uttered P intending three things:
(1) A to produce a particular response R (in this
case is, to believe that S believes P)
(2) A to think (recognize) that S intends (1)
(3) A to fulfill (1) on the basis of his fulfillment of (2).
(“Meaning” 151)
The consequence of non-natural meaning for (I') is either (a) that by
asserting P, S makes someone believe “S believes P,” even though “S believes
P” is not necessarily part of the meaning of the assertion, or (b) that by as-
serting P, S intends to imply that S believes P. In (a), the relation between
assertion and belief is derived from a rule in the linguistic community—a
conversational maxim. In (b), the relation between assertion and belief is
a speaker-implicative relation, because S explicitly intends to imply that
S believes P.
The correct analysis of (I') is tricky. Just like the speaker in the athlete
example did not intend to communicate that Jones is tall, we do not want
to say that Tom intends to communicate his belief that P in the immense
majority of cases (even though he may believe it). In the immense majority
of cases, by uttering “It is raining outside,” Tom intends to communicate
simply that it is raining outside. Accordingly, we cannot conclude from his
assertion P that he intentionally implies that he believes P, and correspond-
ingly the speaker-implicative relation does not correctly characterize (I').
Rather, let us try to characterize the implicative relation in (I') (i.e., by
asserting P, S implies that S believes P) as a relation derived from a conver-
sational maxim. The non-natural meaning that Grice grounds in intention
is communicated by conversational implicature. During an act of spoken
communication, conversational implicature is the act of communicating a
meaning that is neither the literal meaning of the words nor what the words
logically imply (though these aspects of meaning may coincide). Rather, the
meaning is the effect produced (e.g., a belief) in an audience by means of
the recognition of S’s intended utterance P. To grasp the implicatures of a
speaker’s utterances, the audience assumes that the speaker is adhering to
the Cooperative Principle.
Broadly, Grice’s Cooperative Principle is defined as the cooperation
between the speaker and the audience to ensure successful communica-
tion: “make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the
stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk
exchange in which you are engaged” (“Logic” 173). There are four maxims
of the Cooperative Principle: quantity, quality, relation, and manner. The
Moore’s Paradox: Use, iMPlicatUre, and caUse 23
maxim of quantity states that one’s utterance ought to be as informative
as required (and, consequently, not more informative than required); The
maxim of quality can be divided into two maxims: one ought not to say
what one believes to be false, and one ought not to say that for which one
lacks evidence; The maxim of relation states that one ought to say that
which is relevant; And, the maxim of manner states that one’s utterance
ought to be clear and precise (“Logic” 173–74). When the speaker adheres
to these four maxims, an audience can understand the conversational
implicature. Without these maxims, it is difficult to imagine how speech
could be meaningful: e.g., if a speaker could utter something he believed
true or false with no maxim to adhere to, the audience would never be able
to discern a truth from a lie.
It is plausible that (I') could be derived from the Cooperative Prin-
ciple or a maxim we normally adhere to in everyday speech. For instance,
(I') could be a stronger version of one of the maxims of quality: One ought
not to say what one believes to be false. In light of this characterization of
(I'), (M) would be absurd if S were adhering to the maxim of quality.
IV. Conversation-Implicative Relation
Moore set out requirements for (I') in his classificatory comments
that he did not expand on. Above I suggested a possible link between the
maxim of quality and (I'). Let us see if the maxim of quality fulfils the re-
quirements of Moore’s two classificatory comments given above. The first
comment states that the words themselves do not assert belief, but a speak-
er does. The maxim of quality applies only to acts of communication, so
a person ought to be asserting something. Accordingly, the first comment
is satisfied. The second comment states that S, who asserts P, does not
imply “S believes P,” because S could be lying. The maxim of quality is not
defined as follows: one does not say what one believes to be false. Rather,
it is defined as follows: one ought not to say what one believes to be false.
Accordingly, the second comment is also satisfied.
(I') is defined as follows: by asserting P, S implies that S believes P.
In light of the maxim of quality, it is assumed that when S asserts P, S be-
lieves P (or more precisely, it is assumed that it is not the case that S believes
not-P). (M) will become “I do not believe it is raining” and, according to
assumptions based on the maxims of the Cooperative Principle, “I believe
it is raining” (or, more precisely: it is not the case that “I believe it is not
raining”). When S asserts (M), S has contradictory beliefs. Likewise, (M')
will become “I believe it is not raining” and, according to assumptions
based on the maxims of the Cooperative Principle, “I believe it is raining”
24 Monica BarBir
(or more precisely: it is not the case that “I believe it is not raining”). When
S asserts (M'), the content of the speaker’s beliefs is contradictory. I have
shown, as Moore wanted to, a contradiction in the first person assertive
context (either of beliefs or of the content of beliefs), such that unless S
is flouting the maxim of quality (for instance, because S is lying), (M) and
(M') are absurd.
Using Grice’s theory of implication, we were able to characterize the
relation between assertion and belief as a relation derived from a maxim of
conversation; and, using this characterization, we were able to adequately
explain the absurdity in Moore’s Paradox statements.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Austin, J. L. “Performative Utterances.” The Philosophy of Language. Ed. A.
P. Martinich. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008.
Grice, Paul. “Logic and Conversation.” The Philosophy of Language. Ed. A.
P. Martinich. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008.
———. “Meaning.” The Philosophy of Language. Ed. A. P. Martinich. Oxford:
Oxford U P, 2008.
———. “Utterer’s Meaning and Intentions”. The Philosophical Review 68
(1969): 147–77.
Moore, G. E. “Moore’s Paradox.” G. E. Moore: Selected Writings. Ed.
Baldwin, Thomas. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Searle, John R. “The Structure of Illocutionary Acts.” The Philosophy of
Language. Ed. A. P. Martinich. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Philosophical Investigations.
Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.