Aporia vol. 10 no. 2—2000
Consciousness as a HOT Addition
Brooke Bentley
What makes a person conscious? Debates are raging: some argue
that consciousness is merely phenomenal experience. Others
say that consciousness must include an intentional aspect also.
This paper will explore two requirements for the existence of state con-
sciousness, both of which are necessary but not alone sufficient.1 In fact,
although one side argues that the only requirement for a conscious mental
state is the sensing of a stimulus, we will see that what actually makes a
state conscious is the addition of a higher-order thought (HOT) to that
sense experience.
A simple thought experiment fleshes out this relationship between
the HOT and the mental state sensing the stimulus. Suppose I have a
nervous habit. Suppose that whenever I think intently about something, I
bite my nails. Although I consistently bite my nails, the biting is not severe,
so people have not commented on it. I therefore do not introspect my nail-
biting habit. Suppose that I begin thinking intently about my future plans
and I automatically bite my nails. Is my mental state conscious?
Of course, I am thinking about my plans, so the intentional mental
state of thinking and planning (or worrying) is conscious. Technically,
some people might argue that I am also having the experience of biting my
nails, and so my sensory mental state is also conscious. But I do not con-
sciously feel how the nail grates against my teeth, or the particular taste of
the nail in my mouth; I am completely absorbed in my thinking. I am not
aware of my nail-biting state. The nail-biting is not conscious. Therefore,
the mental, or sensing, state of biting my nails is also not conscious.
1 The inquiry of this paper is state consciousness, as opposed to creature consciousness. While
creature consciousness is merely the ability of a creature to have conscious mental states,
state consciousness will be those mental states in which the subject is conscious, or aware, of
something.
2 Brooke Bentley
However, suppose that in the midst of my worrying, I spontaneously
notice, “I have been biting my nails again,” and think, “well, that’s okay;
it’s not doing much damage.” At this point in time, my mental state has
become conscious. I was previously oblivious to aspects of my experience
in the physical world that are now conscious. How is it that this mental
state has suddenly become conscious?
Rosenthal, the main representative of the higher-order thought
(HOT) theory, presents an accommodating explanation. He argues that
my higher-order thought “oh, I am biting my nails” makes my nail-biting
mental state conscious. However, Browne, using Dretske’s distinction
between object and fact awareness, argues that Rosenthal’s theory fails
because the fact awareness of the HOT is not sufficient to make my state
conscious. In other words, Browne argues that the addition of the HOT to
the sense experience is not sufficient, and even unnecessary, for a mental
state to be conscious. I will argue that fact awareness is insufficient to
make a state conscious, but it is nevertheless necessary. Although Browne’s
arguments lead to incorrect conclusions about what is necessary and suf-
ficient for consciousness, I will show that both object and fact awareness
are necessary, though not independently sufficient, to make a mental state
conscious. Nevertheless, the addition of a HOT, or fact awareness, to a pre-
existing object-aware state (which is the common case) is often the deciding
factor for whether state consciousness obtains: consciousness is a HOT
addition.
1. Rosenthal’s Higher-Order Thought Theory
Rosenthal would say that my nail-biting mental state becomes
conscious when I become aware of it. In this case, I cannot become aware
of the state perceptually, because the content of the state exists percep-
tually, although unconsciously, all along. I have the mental state that is
entailed by my nail-biting the whole time, even though I am not aware of
it. Instead, I become aware of the content of my mental state by virtue of
the thought “I am biting my nails again.” This thought is a higher-order
thought (HOT) about the lower-order mental state.
Because this HOT is about the occurrent lower-order mental state,
it makes me transitively conscious of that mental state. The HOT is being
conscious of the state, thereby making me conscious of the state. The
mental state, on the other hand, is what is conscious. I am made aware of the
content, and therefore the mental state becomes intransitively conscious.
Thus, according to Rosenthal, the mental state becomes conscious by
virtue of the HOT.
ConsCiousness as a Hot addition 3
The general rule for state consciousness may be stated as the
following: mental state M is conscious if and only if 1) subject S is in M,
and 2) S has a suitable HOT about M. This rule, however, says nothing
about the consciousness of the HOT. Because the HOT makes the subject
transitively conscious of something else, and not the HOT itself, it follows
that S will not become aware of the HOT itself. S will only become
aware of that which the HOT is about, the content of the mental state.
Because the HOT, itself, is unconscious, S will seem directly conscious of
the mental state. The relation between the HOT and the mental state is
non-inferential and nonobservational. Therefore, although consciousness
is conferred by the HOT, it is direct and immediate. Such consciousness
consists in such a relation explains the transparency of consciousness.
However, if S introspects, then she becomes aware of her HOT,
because a third-order thought makes her transitively conscious of her
second-order thought. The mental state of her initial HOT would then
become an intransitively conscious state. In the nervous habit example, I
would thus become aware that I was aware that I was biting my nails, in
that I recognize that I had before been oblivious to the state. Nevertheless,
the third-order thought remains unconscious, because it is what makes me
conscious of the second-order HOT, thus conferring consciousness upon
the second-order mental state of the HOT.
That HOTs can relationally confer consciousness does not entail that
all HOTs are transitively conscious. That is, the presence of a HOT and the
presence of a certain mental state do not entail each other. I could sponta-
neously think, “I am biting my nails,” but not be biting my nails at all. In
such a case, the thought would not have content. It would not make me
transitively conscious or make any particular state intransitively conscious.
Also, I could bite my nails and never have a HOT, never realizing that I was
doing it. But my mental state would not be conscious.
2. Browne’s Criticism (from Dretske)
Browne, using a distinction of Dretske, argues that HOT theory
does not sufficiently explain how a state becomes conscious. Dretske
makes the distinction of the two kinds of awareness: object awareness
and fact awareness. One is object-aware when one is directly conscious of
something. Object awareness demands that the subject be aware of the
mental state’s content by direct acquaintance. According to Browne, the
moment I bite my nails, I am conscious of them. I feel them in my teeth, I
hear the crunch, and I taste the peculiar texture. I am immediately aware
of those sensations, which are the content of my mental state, and am
4 Brooke Bentley
therefore conscious of them. For Dretske and Browne, if I am thus directly
acquainted with the content of my mental state, then the mental state is
conscious. Therefore, object awareness is sufficient to confer consciousness
upon a mental state.
In this way, Browne contradicts Rosenthal’s claim that a mental state
is made conscious by virtue of a HOT. According to Browne, a subject
is naturally aware of her mental states, and thus acquainted with the
content of those states; they are inherently intransitively conscious. Object
awareness is sufficient for consciousness, and therefore states for which the
subject is object-aware do not need anything extra in order to make them
conscious.
Browne explains that fact awareness, on the other hand, is when one
is conscious that something is such and such a way. Fact awareness is not the
awareness of actual acquaintance, but the awareness that a certain experi-
ence exists. It does not make the subject acquainted with the content of the
mental state, but only points to the fact that there is a particular state. For
example, one might imagine an instance in which someone informed me
that I was indeed biting my nails (and that there was a certain experience
associated with the biting), at a time in which I was completely unaware of
my upper body. Then I would only be fact-aware that I was biting my nails.
Browne argues that this knowledge would not be sufficient to make my
mental state conscious. Indeed, this information would not be sufficient
to make me aware of the content of the associated mental state, because I
would not be acquainted with that content. I would only know intellectu-
ally that the state existed, albeit unconsciously. I would not have any more
access to it.
Book knowledge, or fact awareness, has a different epistemological
virtue than experience, or object awareness. They are two different ways
of conferring consciousness. Browne argues that fact awareness cannot
confer the same kind of consciousness as object awareness because of their
different epistemological access. Where object awareness is awareness of
the content of a mental state, Browne wants to assert that fact awareness
is only awareness that a state exists. While object awareness is directly and
immediately associated with the content, fact awareness can only point to
it.
Browne argues that in Rosenthal’s theory, HOTs only make the
subject fact-aware. Because they lack the directness and content of object
awareness, they cannot sufficiently inform the subject about the content
of the mental state. The fact awareness of HOTs makes a subject only ar-
tificially transitively conscious; they cannot make the subject sufficiently
aware of the mental state to make the mental state intransitively conscious.
Consciousness that a certain mental state exists can never inform the
ConsCiousness as a Hot addition 5
subject of the content of that state. Therefore, fact awareness that a mental
state exists is not sufficient to make the mental state conscious, but only
informs the subject about the existence of some unconscious state.
Browne offers two examples as support. First, subject S is told she
has an unconscious desire. This thought does not make her mental state
conscious. Second, thinking about technical brain processes does not make
the corresponding mental states conscious. In both cases, fact awareness is
not sufficient to confer consciousness on a mental state.
Browne rightly recognizes that fact awareness can never give a subject
object awareness. Fact awareness alone is not sufficient to confer conscious-
ness upon a mental state. However, Browne wants to take this claim one
step further. He claims that fact awareness is not even necessary for a
mental state to be conscious. He argues that my knowing that you have
a sore knee does not make your pain conscious. Similarly, my knowing
that I have a sore knee does not make mine conscious. What makes me
conscious is my object awareness, my immediate acquaintance with my
sore knee. Thus, fact awareness is not necessary.
Browne thus presents two points in opposition to Rosenthal. He
argues that object awareness is sufficient for consciousness and that fact
awareness is not necessary. However, both of these claims are inaccurate.
I will argue that while object awareness is necessary to make a mental
state conscious, it is not sufficient. I will also argue that fact awareness is
necessary but not sufficient to make a state conscious. Both of these claims
are consistent with Rosenthal’s theory.
3. Object Awareness is Necessary but Not Sufficient.
As Browne has shown, object awareness is necessary in order for a
mental state to be conscious. A mental state cannot be conscious without
object awareness because the mental state would lack content. The content
of the object awareness is the mental state. Without it, there would be
nothing for us to be conscious of. By saying that the mental state is
conscious, we are essentially saying that we are object-aware of the content
of that state. Thus, object awareness is necessary for a state to exist, and for
a state to be conscious.
Granted that object awareness is necessary, is it also sufficient
to make a state conscious? Sufficiency does not follow logically from
necessity, but in this case, Browne argues that it does. He argues that
“object awareness, not fact awareness, is what makes the difference” about
whether I am conscious of the pain in my knee. He argues that, to make
a state conscious, only object awareness is capable of placing me in the
6 Brooke Bentley
required relation to that state. Only the object awareness of the mental
state, the awareness of having the sore knee, can make the state conscious,
and it does. My object awareness of the sore knee makes the corresponding
mental state conscious. Therefore, Browne concludes that object awareness
is sufficient to make a mental state conscious.
However, two counter examples show that Browne’s conclusion
cannot be right—object awareness is not sufficient to make a state conscious.
These two counter examples present instances in which the subject is
object-aware, but the corresponding mental state is not conscious. First,
consider subliminal perceptions and blindsight cases. For example, blind-
sight patient P cannot see in a certain visual field: she is blind in that field.
In an experiment, she is shown vertical and horizontal mail slots in the
blind field and then asked to deposit an imaginary letter in an imaginary
slot. The remarkable result is that she often posts the letter in a slot that
is vertical or horizontal, corresponding to the slot that she did not see in
her blind field. Similar results from many experiments clearly show that
subjects process information from their unconscious or blind fields.
In these cases, subject S processes information, which entails the
involvement of some mental state. She is even able to access the informa-
tion of these mental states, although unconsciously, for related activities.
In each case, S is acquainted with the content of the mental state, and
therefore object-aware of the state. But S is not aware of her acquaintance
with the content of the state because the state itself is unconscious. So, S
is object-aware of the content of mental state, although the state is uncon-
scious. Therefore, object awareness does not entail that a mental state is
conscious; it is not sufficient to make a mental state conscious.
Second, consider an instance in which a person drives to a destina-
tion completely absorbed in his thoughts. Upon arrival, he wakes up and
realizes that he cannot recall anything about the trip. He completed the
process unconsciously, but he must have had some awareness in order to
successfully maneuver the car to his destination. During the drive, he must
have had rather extensive object awareness. He must have been aware of
his car, the road, the way to get to the destination, unexpected or unusual
elements along the way, etc. The content of his mental state must have
been extensive and quite complex, and yet he cannot recall anything about
it. He was object-aware of the content of the mental state, and yet com-
pletely unconscious of that state. Therefore, the object awareness was not
sufficient to make the mental state conscious.
These two examples are representative of all the mental states that
object awareness does not make conscious. Therefore, object awareness
cannot be sufficient to make another mental state conscious. Object
ConsCiousness as a Hot addition 7
awareness is thus necessary, but not sufficient, to make a mental state
conscious.
4. Fact Awareness is Necessary but Not Sufficient.
As Browne has shown, fact awareness is not sufficient. A mental state
with only fact awareness is not conscious. For example, Browne argues
that if someone tells subject S that she has an unconscious desire, S would
not thereby become conscious of that mental state. The thought, or being
only fact-aware about her desire, does not make her mental state conscious.
Therefore, fact awareness cannot make mental states conscious. Similarly,
Browne argues that thinking about technical brain processes does not
make the corresponding mental states conscious. Being fact-aware of the
physical processes does not make conscious the mental state that has those
processes as content. Therefore, fact awareness is not sufficient to make a
mental state conscious.
However, Browne then makes an invalid inference, and concludes
that since HOTs are not sufficient for consciousness, they are also not
necessary. He argues that they are not needed in any way to make a mental
state conscious. Fact awareness alone of a sore knee, or only knowing that
I have a sore knee by virtue of a HOT, does not make the mental state of
having the sore knee conscious. He argues that only the sore knee itself is
sufficient to make the state conscious.
Nevertheless, Browne does not argue for this conclusion, he merely
asserts the claim. Rosenthal’s theory conceptually proves why this claim
is false. As previously discussed, when we become aware of a mental state,
then the state is intransitively conscious. Something is required to make
us thus aware of the mental state; we are not inherently aware. This is
demonstrated by the examples in which the subject is object-aware, but the
states are nevertheless unconscious. In such cases, the subject is acquainted
with the content of the mental state, but unaware that she has the state.
Therefore, object awareness is not sufficient to make a state conscious.
Something else is required to put the subject in the necessary relation to
the mental state to make her thus aware.
That something, in Rosenthal’s theory, that is required to make the
subject aware, is the HOT. Intransitive state consciousness comes from a
relation between the subject and the HOT that makes the subject aware of
the state. Only through the relation of the HOT to the mental state, can
the state become conscious. So, while fact awareness is not sufficient, it is
necessary to make the mental state conscious. Consciousness, or sufficient
awareness of the state, is not possible otherwise.
8 Brooke Bentley
So, for Rosenthal, object awareness of the sore knee is not sufficient
to make the mental state conscious. The soreness could exist without it
being conscious. But, when I have a HOT that “my knee is sore,” and am
thus fact-aware of the knee’s condition, then I am sufficiently aware of
the mental state associated with having a sore knee—the mental state is
conscious.
Similarly, when I unconsciously bite my nails, I am directly acquaint-
ed with the content of that mental state, even though I am not consciously
aware of it. However, when I spontaneously have the HOT, “I am biting
my nails again,” then this fact awareness makes the mental state conscious.
Therefore, in both examples, the fact awareness is necessary to make the
mental state conscious. In both cases, the state would not have otherwise
been conscious. Fact awareness is thus not sufficient, but necessary, to
make a mental state conscious.
5. A Rosenthalian Defense
Object awareness and fact awareness are each necessary to make a
mental state conscious. Without either one, the state cannot be conscious.
Rosenthal’s theory is consistent with this claim. It specifically points
out the necessity of fact awareness. But Browne misinterprets Rosenthal
when he assumes that Rosenthal denies that object awareness is necessary
to make a state conscious. Rosenthal assumes the necessity of object
awareness. Only when the subject is object-aware does the possibility exist
for the state to become conscious. Only a HOT that is an addition to a
mental state that already has object awareness can sufficiently make the
state conscious. So, Rosenthal grants the necessity of object awareness,
along with the necessity of fact awareness.
One might argue against the necessity of either object or fact
awareness by arguing that one or the other is sufficient in itself. Upon
examination, however, every such claim ignores the actual presence of the
other awareness. As shown, when Browne claims that object awareness is
sufficient, he ignores the essential role of fact awareness that makes the
state conscious. The necessity of fact awareness to make the state conscious
proves that object awareness is not sufficient.
One might also argue that fact awareness is sufficient to make a state
conscious. For example, one might argue that fact awareness can make one
conscious of a difference or change in mental states, thereby making the
mental state conscious. Even though a subject is not directly acquainted
with the content of a state, she detects that a change has occurred; she is
ConsCiousness as a Hot addition 9
fact-aware that the content of the state is different. Therefore, the state is
conscious, and fact awareness is sufficient to make the state conscious.
However, this cannot be completely accurate. Fact awareness seems
sufficient because one ignores the implicit object awareness. In order for the
subject to be fact-aware that a change has taken place in the mental state,
she must have had some awareness of the content of that state. Therefore,
she must have also had object awareness, no matter how unspecified, in
order to discern the change. Thus, although fact awareness appears to be
sufficient, this case presupposes object awareness, which is also necessary.
Browne interprets Rosenthal as making this kind of incorrect claim.
He argues that, in the special case of introspection, Rosenthal claims
that the third-order, pure fact awareness of the second-order HOT makes
the second-order HOT conscious. According to Browne, the conscious-
ness appears to arise from only fact awareness and no object awareness.
Browne says that this is like the invalid claim that because I have a thought
about the moons of Jupiter (thus being fact-aware about the moons) I am
conscious of the moons (thus being object-aware of the moons). However,
both Browne’s interpretation and analogy of Rosenthal’s argument are
inaccurate.
Rosenthal argues that when a second-order HOT becomes conscious
by virtue of a third-order thought, the second-order thought becomes the
content of the intransitively conscious mental state. So, the third-order
thought makes the subject fact-aware that there is a mental state with the
content of the specific second-order thought. But the second-order thought
is the content of this mental state in a special way: knowing that the second-
order thought exists is knowing the second-order thought by acquaintance,
because the thought is so specific. In introspection, the subject becomes
object-aware of the second-order thought because the third-order thought
necessarily gives the subject fact and object awareness of that mental state.
Therefore, although fact awareness seems to be sufficient to make a mental
state conscious, the fact awareness also entails (and produces) an object
awareness in the subject. Both awarenesses make the state conscious. Fact
awareness is not sufficient, because object awareness is also necessary.
Browne argues that Rosenthal claims that introspection (misin-
terpreted to be a third-order thought that produces only fact awareness)
makes the second-order HOT conscious. We have seen how this is inac-
curate in two respects: 1) the third-order thought also makes the subject
object-aware, so Rosenthal is not claiming that fact awareness is sufficient
for the state to be conscious, and 2) it is the mental state which contains
the HOT, not the HOT itself, that is conscious. Browne argues that this
(misinterpreted) argument is like saying that thinking about the moons of
10 Brooke Bentley
Jupiter makes me object-aware of them (and therefore conscious of them).
This analogy fails in two ways.
First, Rosenthal’s introspection argument is not analogous to
Browne’s example. The introspection instance is qualitatively different
from any other instance; the content of the second-order state is quali-
tatively different from the content of the third-order state. Second-order
states can have a wide variety of contents, but third-order states can only
have the highly specified mental states that contain only a HOT that
makes another state conscious. This distinction is not maintained in
Browne’s analogy because the second-order state does not contain a HOT
that makes another state conscious. It merely contains thoughts about the
moons of Jupiter.
Second, Rosenthal would not even claim that the mere fact awareness
of thinking about Jupiter’s moons would confer object awareness about
them. The thoughts are not suitable HOTs, only thoughts. However, while
the content of this kind of thought cannot make a person object-aware,
the thought itself is the content of some other mental state. The subject
is automatically object-aware of having the thought. So, if the subject
had a thought about having the thought, thereby becoming fact-aware of
the second mental state (the object awareness already existing), then the
mental state about the thought would become conscious. The thought
about the moons of Jupiter is not conscious, but the mental state of having
the thought would be conscious. The mental state of the thoughts is inde-
pendent of the subject’s actual experience of the moons.
Rosenthal argues that fact awareness is not sufficient for a mental
state to become intransitively conscious, because object awareness is also
necessary. A subject becomes conscious of a mental state when she has
both fact and object awareness.
6. Consciousness is Often a HOT Addition.
The addition of a suitable HOT is often what makes conscious the
state that has object awareness. The positive existence of the HOT, and
not the existence of object-awareness, is the determining factor of whether
a state becomes conscious. The presence of the HOT reflects a difference
between fact and object awareness. While a subject is acquainted with
the content of a mental state, the state is nevertheless often unconscious.
The deciding relation that makes the state conscious is lacking. But, with
the addition of a HOT to an already existing object awareness, the state
becomes conscious.
ConsCiousness as a Hot addition 11
However, the HOT must be a suitable one. Browne argues that
thinking about one’s physical brain processes does not make one’s mental
state conscious. Although one has fact awareness that the processes do
exist, one lacks object awareness or direct acquaintance with them.
However, Browne is once again missing the point. If one is thinking about
physical brain processes (or the moons of Jupiter), then one’s mental state
does not contain the information about the processes but contains the
thoughts. So, no HOT is going to make one directly conscious of, or ac-
quainted with, the brain processes. But, a HOT about the thinking about
the processes would be sufficient to make the mental state conscious. One
is already directly acquainted with the thoughts. The addition of a suitable
HOT would make the state conscious.
Similarly, Browne argues that my knowing that you have a sore knee,
or my being fact-aware that you have a sore knee, does not make my mental
state conscious. This is true, not because fact awareness cannot make a
person’s mental state conscious, but because that knowledge is not the
content of my mental state. Again, the content of my mental state would
be the thinking or knowing. To make that state conscious, I would need
a HOT about that thinking or knowing. The HOT (if it is one) that your
knee is sore is not sufficient to make my mental state conscious.
Browne also argues that my knowing that I have a sore knee is not
sufficient to make conscious my mental state of having a sore knee. Again,
this is also true, not because fact awareness is not necessary, but because
object awareness is also required. If someone were to tell me that I had a
sore knee, but I did not feel pain, the mental state of feeling pain would
not be conscious (or perhaps even existent). However, if someone informed
me that my knee was sore and then punched it really hard, the mental
state of that pain would immediately become conscious. If I am object-
aware of the soreness, then the additional HOT makes my mental state
conscious. Otherwise, the possibility still remains that I would not notice
the soreness, because the object awareness is not sufficient to make a state
conscious. In both of these instances, the addition of the suitable HOT is
the final requirement needed to make the mental state conscious.2
While cases exist where object awareness is added to an already
existing HOT to make a state conscious, they are unusual. For example, in
2 One might object that a suitable HOT might not exist for every mental state, even if the subject
is already object-aware. For example, even though the blindsight patient is object-aware of the
content of her mental state, no HOT might make that state conscious. This only means that
while object and fact awareness seem to be generally sufficient to make a mental state conscious
when they are combined, they are not always sufficient.
12 Brooke Bentley
a case of mental illness, a person could have a genuine HOT about a mental
state but not have the mental state. A hypochondriac might think that he
has a serious illness but have none of the physical symptoms. Nevertheless,
in his mental illness, he might physically feel that he has the actual illness.
From his false fact awareness, he creates the mental state associated with
his nonexistent sickness and is thus object-aware (although falsely so) of
that state. The mental state associated with his sickness thereby becomes
conscious, although not genuine. Therefore, object awareness that is added
to fact awareness can make a mental state conscious, although in a peculiar
way.
The far more common occurrence in making a mental state conscious
is the addition of a HOT. So, contrary to Browne’s claim, consciousness is,
in part, is derivable from a HOT. That is, consciousness is often the result
of adding a HOT to a mental state. While object or fact awareness alone
is not sufficient to make a mental state conscious, they are both necessary.
So, when I am absorbed in my thoughts, chewing on my nails, I am truly
oblivious to the world. But, given my object awareness, albeit unconscious,
of my nail-biting state, when the fact awareness of the HOT comes along,
informing me that I am biting my nails, my state is made conscious. Then
maybe I can do something about it—consciousness is a HOT addition.
Works Cited
Browne, Derek. “Consciousness is not HOT.” http://www.phil.canterbury.
ac.nz/derek_browne/hot.html.
Rosenthal, David. “A Theory of Consciousness.” In The Nature of
Consciousness: Philosophical Debates, edited by Ned Block, et al., MIT
Press, 1997.