Aporia vol. 20 no. 1—2010
Explaining Emotional Outbursts:
A Davidsonian Account of
Hursthouse’s Arational Actions
Nicholas Bloom
In his paper, “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” Donald Davidson dis-
cusses what makes an action intentional. According to Davidson, an
agent acts intentionally if the agent acts for a reason. He defines reason
as “a belief and desire” (5). This means that the agent desires to perform
an action of a certain type and believes that the action she chooses is of
that type. This explanation is very plausible since almost all intentional
actions can be explained in this way. For example, if I want to illuminate
my room and believe that turning on a light will do so, my turning on the
light is intentional. In her essay “Arational Actions,” Rosalind Hursthouse
presents a set of counterexamples to Davidson’s belief and desire theory of
intentional action. Her counterexamples are supposed to illustrate arational
actions, which she claims are intentional but do not fit into Davidson’s
belief-desire formula. In this paper, I offer a response on behalf of David-
son by arguing that arational actions do not exist as Hursthouse defines
them. I do this by showing that Hursthouse’s arational actions either satisfy
Davidson’s conditions of intentionality, or they are unintentional.
My argument has four parts. First, I will explain Davidson’s causal
theory of intentional action. Second, I will discuss Hursthouse’s theory of
arational actions and explain how they may threaten Davidson’s theory.
Third, I will present a counterargument to Hursthouse’s theory that shows
how arational actions either fit into Davidson’s formula or are actually un-
intentional. I will do this by explaining two possible epistemic states with
Nicholas Bloom is a senior majoring in philosophy at the University of Notre Dame.
His interests include the philosophies of mind, action, and language.
78 Nicholas Bloom
respect to our emotions: pre-named and post-named actions. Fourth, I
will defend my response to Hursthouse against counterarguments, notably
the charge that the pre-named method of explaining intentional action
removes the moral culpability of the agent performing the action.
I. Davidson’s Belief-Desire Theory of Intentional Action
In “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” Davidson proposes a causal ac-
count of intentional action. A causal theory attributes intentional action
to a motivational phenomenon. In Davidson’s case, he argues that an ac-
tion ϕ is intentional if and only if it is done for a reason. He calls this
reason a primary reason, and argues that primary reasons are the causes of
actions. The primary reason has two necessary characteristics. The first is
a desire or pro-attitude toward a type of action X. This simply means that
the agent wants to do something, such as write a paper (eat soup, greet a
friend, etc.). This desire can be a desire about anything, even of the form “I
wish to express emotion Y.” The second necessary characteristic is a belief
that an action ϕ is an action of type X. If the belief corresponds to both
the desire and the action, then the reason is a primary reason. That is, the
belief is of the form “I desire to do X, and believe that ϕ-ing is an action
that will allow me to fulfill my desire,” meaning the desire and action are
linked. In the first example, this would be a belief that moving my fingers
and pressing the keyboard keys is an action of the type “paper writing”
(or that moving my hands and arms in a certain way was an action of the
type “soup eating”). The belief could even be something like “I believe that
ϕ-ing will allow me to express emotion Y.” Thus, Davidson’s theory can be
outlined as follows:
An action is intentional if and only if
(1) A has a pro-attitude or desire toward actions
of type X.
(2) A believes that ϕ-ing is an action of type X.
So, put together, writing a paper is intentional if (1) I desire to write a
paper, and (2) I believe that moving my fingers and pressing my keyboard is
an action of the type “paper writing.” Davidson explains that not all actions
are preceded by a conscious acknowledgement of a belief and a desire, and
that it is often unnecessary in everyday life to determine the specific belief
and desire of an action (6). However, he states that belief-desire combina-
tions are always present as causes of intentional actions. In fact, Davidson
argues that both a belief and a pro-attitude must be present for an action to
be intentional, which Hursthouse rejects (Hursthouse 57).
ExplaiNiNg EmotioNal outBursts 79
II. Hursthouse’s Objection
Hursthouse objects to Davidson by arguing that his second condi-
tion, a belief that the action is of a certain type, is not necessary for in-
tentional action. Her counterargument hinges on a category of actions she
calls arational actions. According to Hursthouse, arational actions com-
prise “a significant subset of the set of intentional actions explained by
occurent emotion” (57). She explains that “these actions threaten the stan-
dard account . . . by undercutting the false semantic theory that holds
that account in place” (57). Hursthouse gives three necessary conditions
for arational action:
An action is arational if and only if
(1) The action was intentional.
(2) The agent did not do the action for a reason.
(3) If the agent had not been in the grip of an
emotion, the agent would not have acted.
For example, Hursthouse categorizes actions like shouting at objects
because of anger, running or jumping for joy, and tearing one’s clothes
out of grief as arational actions. The problem for Davidson’s theory lies in
Hursthouse’s first two conditions. She explains that arational actions “are
explained solely by reference to desire . . . not to an appropriate belief” (59).
She adds that for the belief-desire account to explain these actions, “the
appropriate belief has to be something absurd,” such as believing a photo
one is tearing actually is the person represented by the photo (Hursthouse
60). According to the Davidsonian belief-desire account, these actions are
unintentional if no belief can be found. In contrast, note that Hursthouse’s
account doesn’t require any such belief for an action to be intentional.
III. My Objection to Hursthouse and Pre-named Actions
I will argue that no action satisfies the conditions Hursthouse places
on arational actions. I argue this by analyzing supposed arational actions
using Davidson’s theory, which I argue gives a more satisfactory account of
this type of action. I do this by differentiating between two epistemic states
with respect to emotion: pre-named and post-named actions. I argue that if
the agent is in a post-named epistemic state, then the action is intentional.
I then argue that Hursthouse’s arational actions can only occur when the
agent is in a pre-named epistemic state. I will show that these actions are
unintentional, but that the agent has some indirect control over them.
80 Nicholas Bloom
Hursthouse states that actions done in the grip of an emotion fall
into a specific category of intentional action. However, I argue that the
emotive properties that motivate an action have ramifications for the in-
tentionality of that action. When in the grip of emotion, we can have two
potential epistemic states regarding that emotion: We are either aware of
the specific emotion we are feeling or we experience the emotion without
knowing what specific emotion it is. In the latter case, we have not yet for-
mally recognized or identified the emotion. To understand this, imagine
feeling angry before saying or thinking something like “I am angry.” I will
call the states before we have named or identified our emotions pre-named
states and the states after we have named or identified our emotions post-
named states. Phrases like “uncontrollable rage” and “fits of rage,” could
potentially be used to describe this type of state.
Most of our intentional, emotion-influenced actions fit into the
post-named category. These actions that occur during post-named states
can be described using beliefs and desires in the following way:
(1) A desires to express emotion Y.
(2) A believes that ϕ-ing is an action that will
express emotion Y.
This shows that post-named emotions comfortably fit Davidson’s explana-
tion: they are actions done in order to express emotion. Imagine the case
where I am filled with love for a significant other, and because of my love I
desire to cook her dinner. As a result I shop for the food and spend a great
deal of time preparing it. The cooking is clearly intentional: I know that
I am in love and I desire to display my love and I believe that cooking din-
ner would allow me to do so. So, when I am in a post-named state I have
named my emotion and can intentionally express it with an appropriate
belief-desire combination. A belief-desire pair of this type always explains
post-named actions, but other present belief-desire pairs may also ex-
plain these actions as well.
I should note that in distinguishing post-named actions, I take for
granted that it is impossible to desire the expression of an emotion without
first naming or identifying that emotion. But this shouldn’t be problematic.
It seems absurd to desire to express an emotion we have not yet identi-
fied. That would require that we know what we are desiring, and at the
same time not know. Thus, another category of actions is needed.
The remaining category, pre-named actions, accounts for instances
in which an emotion has not yet been identified, so an appropriate belief-
desire combination does not yet exist. I argue that these actions are
unintentional, but with a caveat: the action itself is unintentional, but
ExplaiNiNg EmotioNal outBursts 81
the agent has some indirect control over the emotion which motivates the
action.1 Pre-named actions are, however, caused by an emotion. I argue
that this emotion is one over which we have no control, since we have
not yet identified it. The actions resulting from these emotions only flow
through the agent, rendering the agent incapable of controlling whatever
actions result. This makes pre-named actions appear very similar to cases
of reflex or instinct. Indeed, pre-named actions are analogous to reflex
actions insofar as no rational thinking is involved. They are simply uncon-
trolled responses to stimuli, much like swatting a mosquito. However, there
is a distinct difference between cases of pre-named actions and cases of
impulse. Pre-named actions are always and only a response to an emotional
stimulus, whereas other cases of reflex type actions are responses to physical
or other stimuli.
Pre-named actions are distinct from Hursthouse’s arational actions
because they explain these actions without referencing a desire. Hurst-
house argues that all arational actions have a desire. However, in cases like
these, agents can have no desire because they have not named an emotion,
and therefore cannot desire to express it. Any other desire conforms to
Davidson’s belief-desire pair. Since pre-named actions have neither, they are
unintentional. To demonstrate this, I will attempt to use them to explain
some of Hursthouse’s examples of arational actions.
Hursthouse gives several examples of supposed arational actions:
“violently destroying or damaging anything remotely connected with the
person . . . one’s emotion is directed toward”; “throwing an ‘uncooperative’
tin opener on the ground or out of the window,” “jumping up and down,”
and “covering one’s eyes when they are already shut” (58). There are many
more, but this serves as a decent gauge for the type of actions she is talking
about. I will argue that these actions can be successfully explained using the
pre-named and post-named categories.
First, imagine violently destroying something, particularly something
valuable. It seems that no one would perform this action were she not in
the grip of emotion. In addition, I argue that we very rarely, if ever, have the
specific desire to destroy something—particularly if it is something fragile
and of great value. This is not to say that a desire could not be present, but
imagine a case where a person destroys her flatscreen television. We could
probably agree that, had the person not been in the grip of emotion, she
would not have destroyed the television. In addition, it seems nearly cer-
tain that no one ever truly wants to destroy her own television, even when
in the grip of an emotion. Next, the case of throwing an object is almost
1 I will explain how this happens in greater detail in the section on moral culpability.
82 Nicholas Bloom
identical to the destruction case. We rarely imagine a desire whose focus is
the destruction of any object, let alone an expensive possession. The most
plausible explanation is a total lack of thought, with the action explained
by an emotional reflex type action. Finally, covering one’s eyes seems like
a quintessential emotional reflex case where a person is so overcome with
emotion that she simply reacts, which is exactly the type of action the pre-
named account describes. In this case an emotionally based desire cannot
be present either, since the emotion has not been named. Another desire
could exist, such as the desire to hide from a scary movie, but this action
would conform to Davidson’s belief-desire account (i.e., I desire to hide
from a movie, and believe that covering my eyes is an action of type
“hiding”). Thus, in these cases, either no desire is present, or a suitable
belief-desire pair exists.
Imagine a person who acknowledges his emotion and then acts. This
sounds exactly like a post-named action where an appropriate belief-desire
pair can be found. It could not be a pre-named action, since a pre-named
action takes places before emotion recognition or naming. After any type
of emotion naming, an emotion-caused action is a post-named action
(though another belief-desire combination could be found).
One might object to the post-named action argument by presenting a
case where an agent feels an emotion, identifies the emotion, acknowledges
that the action will not express the emotion, and then performs an action
anyway. Imagine a case where I am angry, I have identified my emotion,
and I desire to punch my computer monitor. After consideration, I know
that punching my computer monitor will not express my emotion, but I do
it anyway. This case seems, quite clearly, like a case of compulsion. In these
cases, the agent has no reason at all for acting destructively but does so any-
way because of an irrational motivation. That is, if the action is done for no
reason, is motivated by an emotion, is done in contradiction to the belief-
desire combination, and is done in a post-named state, then it seems the
agent acts compulsively. But a compulsive action is not intentional. This is
because the belief contradicts the desire and does not link the desire and
the action. Thus it cannot cause the action in the way Davidson requires.
In addition, this claim is supported further by Hursthouse’s descriptions
of the actions she categorizes as arational. An arational or irrational action
implies an absence of rational thought, and a lack of thought bodes poorly
for Hursthouse’s assertion that these actions are intentional.
While not all intentional actions require reasoned thought, those
that do not are morally irrelevant because they are impulsive (as described
above). They are miniscule, reflex-driven actions such as scratching an itch
or swatting a mosquito. To reiterate, these actions differ from emotion-
caused action because they are not caused by an emotion. In addition,
ExplaiNiNg EmotioNal outBursts 83
non-emotional, impulsive actions are ones that never have the capacity to
be morally relevant. One can imagine a situation in which scratching an
itch would be morally relevant, but these cases generally don’t apply to ev-
eryday life. Furthermore, if one is going to follow Hursthouse and do away
with the belief component of intentional action on the grounds that it is
not always present, it seems that one ought to do away with the desire com-
ponent as well (as I have done with pre-named actions). We ought to do
this since, like Hursthouse says of beliefs, we cannot be assured that we will
always find a desire-based cause to the action, especially if that action is pre-
named. However, we will always be able to find an emotionally based cause
in a pre-named action, so we ought to explain these actions completely in
terms of emotions instead of beliefs and desires.
It seems that pre-named actions better account for Hursthouse’s
examples than her own definition of arational actions. The pre-named cat-
egory of actions are unintentional because they are done out of emotional
impulse before the emotion has been named. Any action done after the
emotion has been named fits into the standard Davidsonian belief-desire
pair. Therefore, Hursthouse’s arational actions are better described as pre-
named actions, and therefore unintentional, with no desire present. If a
desire is present, then the emotion has been named, and thus has a cor-
responding belief.
IV. Objections
The Moral Culpability Objection
The first and most important objection to the preceding account is
the problem of moral culpability. Pre-named actions are unintentional, or
at least close enough to unintentional that they seem to remove all moral
culpability from the agent. One might argue that a murder performed as
a pre-named action would not be an action for which the agent would be
responsible. This is certainly not a possibility we want to admit, and so the
problem of moral culpability must be solved. The closest legal counterpart
to this problem is the “crime of passion,” in which an agent pleads tempo-
rary insanity. This concept reinforces the pre-named action account, since
those actions are said to be unintentional.
However, I assume we want to hold agents accountable for some
pre-named actions. On this assumption, I argue that agents can still be
held indirectly accountable for their actions because of their power to ac-
tively moderate their emotions. By this I mean engaging in preventative
exercises. We are in a position to consciously and intentionally perform
84 Nicholas Bloom
post-named actions that prevent our emotions from causing us to commit
morally reprehensible actions in the future, even to the point of stopping
immoral pre-named actions. Though some may be able to moderate their
emotions subconsciously, the majority of people can and must moder-
ate emotions intentionally. Imagine meditation programs, counting to ten,
gripping stress balls, or attending anger management classes. All of these
methods presuppose that we occasionally have unruly emotions that can
be modified by performing intentional actions, thereby minimizing the ef-
fects of uncontrollable future emotions. That is, we recognize and name
these emotions and then seek to change them. All are methods by which
we intentionally perform actions in order to control our future emotions
with the goal of preventing negative results. The assumption is that since
controlling emotions is an intentional, post-named action, we can hold
people responsible for their failure to do so, particularly in the context of
a morally culpable action. We can control our future pre-named actions
through the intentional practice of post-named actions.
Let’s begin with an example. Consider Bert. He is a young philosophy
student who learns that he failed his philosophy final exam. In response to
this, he throws his computer out the window in a fit of rage. Now suppose
I also failed my philosophy final exam. This has, in fact, happened, and I
did not throw my laptop out the window. I was overcome by the same (or
similar) emotions as Bert, but I did not act in the same way. It is entirely
possible that I yelled or punched a pillow, but I did nothing for which I
should be held morally culpable. Though neither of us had control over
the emotion in the moment that it caused us to act, we did have control
over our emotion-influencing actions leading up to that point. That is, we
had the power to indirectly control our emotions through these actions.
Therefore, though we cannot hold Bert accountable for his computer bash-
ing because he did it unintentionally (on Davidson’s account), we are able
to hold him accountable for his computer bashing because he failed to take
preventative measures before his action, and thus failed to control his emo-
tions properly during his action.
The notion of holding agents accountable for unintentional actions
is fairly common. Imagine that a drunk driver accidentally hits and kills
a pedestrian. In this case, the killing is legally regarded as unintentional.
However, the drunk driver is punished for an unintentional action because
of other, intentional actions that ultimately led to involuntary manslaugh-
ter. Since we view drunk driving as morally reprehensible, we punish intoxi-
cated drivers for any action resulting from their drunk driving. Thus, drunk
drivers are guilty both for the drunk driving and killing, because they failed
to control actions which indirectly led them to both consequences. The
same is true in pre-named actions, where controlling emotions is analogous
ExplaiNiNg EmotioNal outBursts 85
to limiting alcohol intake in the drunk driving case. In both cases, we can
hold the agent morally culpable for their unintentional actions because of
the fact that those unintentional actions resulted from morally culpable
intentional actions that the agent performed.
This concept is also common in the language used to describe emo-
tion. Phrases like “you shouldn’t have let your emotions get the best of you”
ascribe moral culpability to a failure of emotional control. Such phrases as-
sume that the majority of people manage to control their emotions in such
a way that they never, or at least rarely ever, perform morally reprehensible
actions when in the grip of an emotion. If we can hold people morally cul-
pable for their inability to control emotions, then that strengthens the case
for regarding the actions that control emotion as an intentional actions.
Imagine a man named Lawrence. This man has a history of anger
management issues but keeps his anger moderately in check. For several
years, his worst offense is angering an occasional customer service repre-
sentative at his local grocery store. Lawrence has no reason to be blamed
or punished for any of these actions. However, one day, he finds out that
his wife has been cheating on him with his best friend. Lawrence is so over-
come with rage that he strangles his friend to death. Lawrence can be held
accountable for the murder of his best friend since he failed to intention-
ally control his emotions over time, and this case applies equally to some-
one with no anger problems. Pre-named actions like these are completely
driven by emotion, and because they are out of the agent’s control, we can
fault the emotion for the action. As mentioned earlier, the agent has no
control over what his action is, so the emotion is the only active culprit.
However, because we regard emotion control as an intentional action, any
morally reprehensible action (like drunk driving) that flows from uncon-
trolled emotions renders the agent responsible.
The emotion control concept has a few requirements. First, the agent
must be a rational, conscious human being. Those agents incapable of mak-
ing regular rational decisions are excluded, since they do not seem to fit
Hursthouse’s assumptions that arational actions are a secondary case to
rational, intentional action.
Second, the emotions must not be intentionally strengthened in any
way. This qualification includes side effects of known emotion-enhancing
catalysts. This means that situations like steroid-induced anger are includ-
ed under those for which agents are held morally culpable. However, if an
agent is taking a prescription drug for an illness-related problem and
an unintended side-effect of the drug is emotion enhancement, the agent
should only be held partially responsible, if at all.
Third, the agent must have had at her disposal the ability to influ-
ence and control emotions prior to the event for which he or she is being
86 Nicholas Bloom
blamed. This will be explained in more depth later, but some sort of regular
influence over emotions is necessary. As a note, it should be evident that
meeting these three requirements is not rare. In fact, most people operate
under these requirements all the time. However, we exclude people whose
actions are always pre-named actions for a similar reason as the first require-
ment. The assumption is that pre-named actions are exceptions to the rule
of regular intentional or post-named actions.
Possible Redefinitions of Intentionality
Hursthouse might respond by insisting that arational actions do in
fact exist. I have explained how a Davidsonian philosopher can account
for Hursthouse’s arational actions by classifying them as unintentional.
Because of this, and because Hursthouse uses the intentionality of the ac-
tion in her definition of intentional action, Hursthouse must explain how
arational actions are intentional. She rejects the Davidsonian belief-desire
account of intentional action on the grounds that arational actions exist.
However, she does not provide a definition of intentional action to replace
Davidson’s definition. So, Hursthouse would need to prove that at least
some of the pre-named actions are intentional, and I see two possible ways
she might do this.
The first way is to consider two properties of intentional action as
described by Anscombe: the non-observational knowledge of action and
the application of the question “Why?” (9–15). Non-observational knowl-
edge is simply a priori knowledge, or knowledge that one has independent
of any experience. For Anscombe, the two properties are intertwined. She
explains that in order for an action to be intentional, the question “Why?”
must apply to the agent’s action in a reason-giving way. The question’s
application depends on the agent’s non-observational knowledge. If the
agent (a) lacks the non-observational knowledge of what he or she is doing,
or (b) lacks the non-observational knowledge that X is the cause of his or
her action, then the question “Why?” has no reason-giving application,
and the action is not intentional. For example, if I am circling my arms
in the air, I presumably know I am doing so. If I have to be told I am doing
so, the action would be unintentional. Or, if I know that I am circling
my arms, but I don’t know a priori why I’m doing so, the action also
seems unintentional.
Under this formulation of intentionality, pre-named actions could
not be intentional because agents lack the non-observational knowledge of
the fact that such and such is the cause of their ϕ-ing. In order to overcome
this, Hursthouse must find a way to explain how, in participating in her
ExplaiNiNg EmotioNal outBursts 87
arational actions, agents have the non-observational knowledge that such
and such is the cause of their actions. While she argues that agents asking
the question “Why” could respond with either “I just wanted to” or “I felt I
had to,” she fails to provide any examples of non-observational motivating
knowledge (58). The latter answer sounds like a case of compulsion, and
the former answer provides a desire-based motivation at best, which does
not necessarily explain an intentional action. That is, the applicability of
the question “Why?” is a necessary but not sufficient condition for describ-
ing an action as intentional. In addition, neither of these reasons describes
the emotion as the motivating cause, which is one of Hursthouse’s require-
ments for arational action.
In light of this, Hursthouse gives a third response to the “Why?” ques-
tion: “Because I was so frightened (or happy, or excited, [or] ashamed)” (58).
This explanation gives a possible response to the need for non-observational
knowledge. However, if we put this knowledge into Anscombe’s formula,
we would get something like this: Agent A has non-observational knowl-
edge that emotion Y is the cause of his ϕ-ing. However, this looks exactly
like the knowledge needed for post-named cases described earlier, where
the agent has a belief and desire about expressing the emotion. Thus, in
order for Hursthouse’s third response to be plausible she would need to
explain how agents could know which emotion they are experiencing, be
aware of the fact that the emotion is causing them act, and yet not form
any appropriate belief-desire combination, which is impossible since they
know the cause of their action and thus must have an appropriate belief
and desire.
The second way Hursthouse could solve the dilemma is by giving
an account of intentional action that is compatible with her definition of
arational action. Hursthouse could assume that in cases of emotive causes,
the emotion replaces or removes the need for a belief, allowing the desire
to motivate the action completely. However, as discussed earlier, this does
not necessarily follow. The fact that I am angry and desire to do something
does not mean the resulting, corresponding action is intentional. It is
entirely possible that I desire to do something and do it unintentionally.
For example, consider a case where I desire to let go of a rope holding my
rock-climbing friend, and my belief and desire to do so makes my hands
sweat, so I drop the rope. While the belief and desire caused the action, it
didn’t do so in the right way. Regardless, it seems Hursthouse must come
up with a definition of intentional action, since without it, her argument
is incomplete. Even if we ignore this omission, Hursthouse’s account
of arational action is still not the most complete or accurate account of
its type.
88 Nicholas Bloom
V. Conclusion
I have explained both Davidson’s argument and Hursthouse’s re-
sponse, showing that a Davidsonian philosopher can successfully account
for Hursthouse’s arational actions with greater accuracy than Hursthouse.
I have addressed the problem of moral culpability regarding pre-named
actions, and have demonstrated how this might be applied. Finally, I have
explained that, in order for Hursthouse to present an acceptable response,
she would have to give a new account of intentional action. If Hursthouse
is unable to do this, the pre-named account stands as the best way to ex-
plain actions of this nature.
Works Cited
Anscombe, G. E. M. Intention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1956.
Davidson, Donald. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon,
2001.
Hursthouse, Rosalind. “Arational Actions.” The Journal of Philosophy 88.2
(1991): 57–68.