Aporia vol. 11 no. 2—2001
Misinterpretation in Augustine’s Confessions
Daniel Brough
In Saint Augustine’s Confessions, signs exist on two levels: on the level
of Augustine’s use of signs to represent experience, and on the level of
the interaction between characters in the narrative. Misinterpretation of
signs occurs rampantly in the Confessions because language is incapable of
accurately representing truth and because the sign-signified relationship is
dependent upon the context and condition in which the sign is delivered.
The former is a failure of Augustine’s language to accurately represent ex-
perience, a failure which has ramifications for evolving misinterpretations
across history; the latter is a failure of the narrative’s characters to correctly
interpret signs. The fact that these misinterpretations occur in the reader
is obvious and shows that language is inadequate to represent, but the
fact that they also occur among the characters in the Confessions shows
that Augustine must have anticipated misinterpretation in the use of his
own semiotics. I will show this by viewing the possible misinterpretations
through the lens of deconstruction, a modern theory of literary criticism.
In On Christian Doctrine, Augustine makes the proposition that
doctrine consists entirely of things and signs; a thing is something which is
not used to represent something else, and a sign is what represents a thing
(1.II).1 R. A. Markus writes that words are signs par excellence for Augustine,
and that his theory of signs was really intended to be a theory of language
(65). In speaking about language in terms of signs, Augustine delineates
three more distinctions: signs that signify other signs (synonyms), signs
which signify things, and things which are known without signs (Burleigh
66–67). When applied to language, the notion of signs referring to signs
1 Signs are ontologically equivalent to things in the sense that both exist, but they are not equal
in being. In The Teacher, Augustine notes that “whatever exists on account of something else
is inferior to that on account of which it exists” (ix, 26). Likewise, knowledge is better than
words.
22 Daniel Brough
deals with metalanguage. In describing the relationship between signs
and their objects, Augustine notes the dissimilarity between the sign and
the signified: the Latin “homo,” for instance, is not equivalent to a living,
breathing male (The Teacher viii, 22). Some things can be known and ap-
prehended by the intellect without the use of signs, such as the nonverbal
demonstration of a particular action to an observer (The Teacher x, 32).
Thus, Augustine’s concept of semiotics allows for extensive variation in
semantics and other linguistic fields; his construction of language is liberal
in its allowance of particular relationships between sign and object. These
allowances will become important later on in our analysis.
The words which make up the Confessions, like any other narrative,
signify not only material things, but also events which transpired during
the course of Augustine’s life. In this sense, Augustine’s life becomes a
text—a series of events represented in words. It nearly goes without saying
that Augustine intended for his life to be read and interpreted by others;
the events in Book VIII that lead up to his conversion set this precedent.
Here, Augustine tells of the experiences of Ponticianus, Antony, and
Victorinus, the latter of which causes Augustine to “glow with fervour to
imitate him” (Confessions VIII.5). Victorinus’s narrative inspired Augustine
to action, and its inclusion in Augustine’s narrative hints that Augustine
has the same purpose in mind for his readers. Let us consider the anecdote
of Ponticianus as a representative example: inspired by the presence of
Paul’s writings (which contain symbols representing facts), Ponticianus tells
the story of how he and his companions found a book containing the story
of Antony, which moved them to conversion. The narratives in this case
are many and multilayered: the reader of the Confessions reads a narrative
about Augustine’s experience with a narrative, which in turn contains a
narrative. Stories are acting both as signs and things; Ponticianus’s story,
for instance, is a sign representing his conversion, and his conversion is a
sign stemming from Antony’s narrative. It is in this narrative context that
Augustine wishes to place his life; literarily speaking, he wants to fit his life
into a particular genre.
There are, however, a few misfires that arise in Augustine’s narrative
due to the fallible nature of language as explained by Augustine’s own
semiotics. The first is illustrated in the first line of the narrative: “Can
any praise be worthy of the Lord’s majesty?” (Confessions I.1). In the light
of Augustine’s opinion that the sign-signified relationship in language is
random and inadequate, the idea of worthiness is equivalent to capabil-
ity; Augustine is asking if his praise, or any of his language, is capable of
capturing the Lord’s majesty. Augustine’s confession will surely fall short
of being equivalent to the glory and majesty of God because it is presented
Misinterpretation in augustine’s Confessions 23
in imperfect language; the word “majesty,” for instance, is not equivalent
to the actual majesty of God.
On a similar note, Augustine recounts his experience in learning
language in the following anecdote:
I noticed that people would name some object and then
turn towards whatever it was that they had named. I
watched them and understood that the sound they made
when they wanted to indicate that particular thing was
the name which they gave to it . . . when my tongue
had mastered the pronunciation, I began to express my
wishes by means of them. (Confessions I.8)
Here, Augustine is hinting at the randomness inherent in the relationship
between signs and things; something has a particular name simply because
that is the name assigned to it by consensus. Since signs are assigned so
randomly to objects, it seems natural that they should have little to no
intrinsic correspondence to that which they signify.
The second and third semiotic incongruities occur, ironically enough,
in moments of conversion and introduce the problem of intentionality in
semiotics. In Book VI, Augustine the teacher takes an opportunity to il-
lustrate a point in class by referring to the arena games that held so many
of his students captive. Alypius, a particular friend of Augustine’s who
is addicted to the sensuality of the arena, takes Augustine’s example as a
personal rebuke, in spite of the fact that Augustine had not intended his
example as such. Alypius consequently renounces all association with the
games and never returns to them (Confessions VI.7). This instance illustrates
a different kind of incongruity between sign and signified—Alypius under-
stood Augustine’s signs in a different way than Augustine had intended.
Augustine’s own conversion demonstrates a similar experience.
While in Vercundus’s garden, tormented by the disunion of his own
will, Augustine hears a child singing, “Take it and read, take it and read.”
Augustine assumes this is a child’s game, but since he cannot remember
which game it could be, he takes it as a divine message to read the first
passage of scripture he can get his hands on; this, of course, is the catalyst
to his conversion (Confessions IX.12). Again, this is a misinterpretation of
a sign; the children were not singing to prompt Augustine’s conversion.
There are a few additional considerations here, as with the other example:
it could be that God speaks through other humans, and that his message
is in fact not misunderstood—a point which is supported by the fact that
Augustine reads a scripture (which could be interpreted as the direct voice
of God) that actually does address his particular concern. However, the
fact still remains that Augustine heard a message that the children were not
24 Daniel Brough
intending to sing; this is the message and misinterpretation that prompts
him to action, and the sign-signified dichotomy takes on an entirely new
meaning due to a misinterpretation of intentionality.
Augustine’s theory of signs combines literal and figurative interpreta-
tion of scripture, thus allowing for a broad spectrum of exegesis (Markus
65). Augustinian semiotics, however, subject a text to the possibility of two
kinds of mis-interpretation. First, the insufficiency of language itself makes
it impossible to communicate an idea accurately, or rather to assimilate
language to reality. The second possibility arises in the misinterpreta-
tion of the signs themselves; signs are contextual and therefore subject to
misinterpretation depending on the background of the receiver. Viewing
these possible misinterpretations through a modern lens will magnify the
impossibility of texts, in Augustine’s semiotic perception, of ever receiving
correct interpretation.
Augustine’s semiotics lend themselves to a forceful deconstruction.
In Book II of On Christian Doctrine, Augustine uses a contrast between
Latin and Greek as an example:
Therefore just as . . . significations move men’s minds
in accordance with the consent of their societies, and
because this consent varies, they move them differently,
nor do men agree upon them because of an innate value,
but they have a value because they are agreed upon.
(2.XXIV)
In this sense, we see signs coming to function as variables which can mean
just about anything, depending on the interpreter. The notion of a variable
coincides with Jacques Derrida’s deconstructionist notion of “freeplay.”
Derrida defines freeplay as “a field of infinite substitutions in the closure of
a finite ensemble . . . The movement of signification adds something, which
results in the fact that there is always more” (967). Furthermore, Derrida
mentions “two interpretations of interpretation, of structure, of sign, of
freeplay” (970). One seeks to decipher and find an absolute truth, and
the other is content with the vast possibilities of meaning. John Haldane
concurs with this interpretation when he recognizes that Augustine’s
theory of memory—”Mentalese,” as he calls it—can produce signs that can
either stand for one thing or for many (460). Deconstructionist criticism,
therefore, gives a variety of possible meanings to a given sign or text and
exposes contradictions between signs. In this sense, Augustine and Alypius
merely assign two possible meanings to their respective experiences out of
an infinite set.
Augustine accepts Derrida’s second “interpretation of interpretation”
in his explanation of the ineffability of God. On this topic, Augustine
Misinterpretation in augustine’s Confessions 25
writes that assigning God the sign “ineffable” creates a contradiction in
terms, since something ineffable is un-describable and the assignation
of the term describes something. Augustine concludes that “this contra-
diction is to be passed over in silence rather than resolved verbally”(On
Christian Doctrine 1.VI). Here he seems to be accepting the multiplicity of
interpretations and passing off the doctrine of God (Trinitarianism) as a
mystery. Logically, a contradiction implies all statements; any interpreta-
tion, therefore, can be assigned to this particular sign/variable. Here, the
two possible misinterpretations are melted into one: God is inherently
un-describable by language, and Augustine’s signs referring to God enjoy
unlimited freeplay in their possible significations. Augustine also cites am-
biguities in understanding the grammar of a particular language as sources
for multiple interpretations (On Christian Doctrine 1.XIII). Deconstruction
thus establishes a binary relationship between nothing and everything;
since everything is a possibility, nothing is certain. Herein, perhaps, lies
the rub of the inability of language to correspond to reality, especially
to the reality of God. J. J. O’Donnell writes that “Human words used by
humans fail in the presence of the divine, and whatever can be said is only
approximation, and most human discourse fails to say anything of God at
all, despite endless loquacious efforts” (“Augustine’s Idea of God” 23–24).
A multiplicity of possible words exists because of the lack of one precise
word, or a word that precisely corresponds with its signified object.
Gene Fendt melds the incompetence of language and deconstruc-
tionist freeplay into a startling assertion: Augustine’s praise to God in
fact consists of effecting his own deconstruction. Fendt notes that in four
chapters, Augustine eliminates “even the possibility of speaking to or of
God,” but it is not true that there is pure nothingness in the text. According
to Fendt, textuality exists, “the presence of the absent” (35–40). Augustine
is writing an “impossible text.” Augustine plans on doing away with the
world, and since the world is a world of signs, he plans on doing away
with them as well. According to Fendt, Augustine uses the impossibility of
constructing a sign worthy of God as a paradoxical tribute to God. Out of
all the possible signs which might signify God’s majesty (all of which are,
of course, inadequate), Augustine chooses “no sign,” thus implying that
Augustine accepts the various possibilities of meaning inherent in his text.
By a strict definition this would fall into the category of representation that
Augustine designates as that which is signified by no sign at all. If Fendt’s
interpretation is carried further, however, the absence of a sign is itself
a sign, since it seems to signify some other intangible truth. Thus, there
seems to be another, existential sign-signified relationship: that which is
signified by nothingness. Regardless whether one accepts Fendt’s explana-
tion, the fact remains that the fallibility of Augustine’s semiotic doctrine
26 Daniel Brough
is perpetrated in his own text; this only shows a possible awareness on the
part of Augustine of his theory’s imperfection.
Augustine’s own semiotic theory allows misreadings to occur both
of the Confessions and in the Confessions; the inclusion of semantic errors
in Augustine’s account of his life suggests that Augustine is responding to
the inadequacy of his own system of signs relative to language. The fact
that Augustine’s characters fall victim to the same misreadings as his text
hints that Augustine was aware of the fallibility of his semiotics. Augustine
never regards any interpretation as a misinterpretation; I have supplied
that misnomer here in the present. The infinite freeplay of signs allows
for an infinite number of possible interpretations. As O’Donnell notes,
“When we are best at explaining Augustine, we are then perhaps furthest
from his thought” (“Extended Remarks on Augustine’s Confessions”).
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Saint Augustine. The Confessions. Translated by R. S. Pine-Coffin, edited by
Mortimer J. Adler, Encyclopedia Britannica, 1990.
———. On Christian Doctrine. Translated by D. W. Robertson, Jr., Bobbs-
Merrill, 1958.
———. The Teacher. In The Library of Christian Classics, vol. VI, edited by John
H. S. Burleigh, The Westminster Press, 1953.
Burleigh, John H. S. Introduction and Analysis. The Teacher, by Saint
Augustine, in The Library of Christian Classics, vol. VI, edited by John
H.S. Burleigh, the Westminster Press, 1953.
Derrida, Jacques. “Structure, Sign, and Play in the Discourse of the Human
Sciences.” Translated by Richard Macksey and Eugenio Donato, in
The Critical Tradition: Classic Texts and Contemporary Trends, edited by
David H. Richter, Bedford Books, 1989.
Fendt, Gene. “Confessions’ Bliss: Postmodern Criticism as a Palimpsest of
Augustine’s Confessions.” Heythrop Journal, vol. 36, no. 1, 1995, pp.
30–45.
Haldane, John. “The Life of Signs.” Review of Metaphysics, vol. 47, 1994.
Markus, R. A. “St. Augustine on Signs,” Phronesis, vol. 2, 1957.
O’Donnell, J. J. “Augustine’s Idea of God.” Augustinian Studies, vol. 25,
1994, pp. 25–35.
———. “Extended Remarks on Augustine’s Confessions.” ccat.sas.upenn.
edu/jod/augustine/Extended-Remarks-on-Confessions. Accessed
15 April 2001.1
1 Editor’s Note: This has since been moved to Papers on Augustine by J.J. O’Donnell, https://
faculty.georgetown.edu/jod/augustine/Extended-Remarks-on-Confessions. Accessed 29 July
2019. There is no permanent link at this time.