AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
How Predictable Are We?
CARL BROWNSON
THISpaper will address the question of how it is, exactly, that we are
able to predict the behaviors of our fellow human beings. More par-
ticularly, it will address an answer given to this question by Daniel
Dennett. According to Dennett, we can predict the behavior of our fellow
human beings quite effectively using the following mechanism:
First you decide to treat the object whose behavior is to be predicted
as a rational agent; then you figure out what beliefs that agent
ought to have, given its place in the world and its purpose. Then
you figure out what desires it ought to have, on the same consider-
ations, and finally you predict that this rational agent will act to fur-
ther its goals in the light of its beliefs. A little practical reasoning will
in many—but not all—instances yield a decision about what the agent
ought to do; that is what you predict the agent willdo.1
Dennett calls this strategy the Intentional Stance. I will argue that he
grounds the Intentional Stance on assumptions of human optimality,
assumptions that according to current thought in evolutionary biology,
cannot be defended. Dennett’s strategy would be more plausible were he
to reestablish his strategy based on empathy rather than optimality.
So, what gives us the “many but not all” clause in the above statement
about this predictive mechanism? Dennett says, “The objective fact is that
the intentional strategy works as well as it does, which is not perfectly. No
Carl Brownson is senior studying philosophy at the University of Tennessee. He will
pursue a Ph.D. at the City University of New York this fall.
CARLBROWNSON
one is perfectly rational, perfectly unforgetful, all–observant, or invulnera-
ble to fatigue, malfunction, or design imperfection. This leads inevitably
to circumstances beyond the power of the Intentional Strategy to
describe.”2 If this strategy works in the manner Dennett claims it does, it
would be of interest to find out how often and in what capacity those
imperfections in rationality, design, memory, et al., come into play. The
usefulness of this predictive mechanism would be proportional in some
way to the avoidance of these problems. If this predictive mechanism fails
to escape these problems often enough, the usefulness of this strategy will
quickly become marginal. Dennett’s strategy requires individuals to
achieve relative optimality in the above-mentioned categories (rational-
ity, et al.) for his predictive strategy to be of use in predicting human
behavior. So why does Dennett think the intentional strategy works “as
well as it does”?
The first answer to [this] question of why the intentional strategy
works is that evolution has designed human beings to be rational, to
believe what they ought to believe and want what they ought to want.
The fact that we are products of a long and demanding evolutionary
process guarantees that using the intentional strategy on us is a safe
bet.3
This evolutionary answer, however, illustrates a critical weakness in
Dennett’s answer, a weakness that he does not seem to acknowledge. This
weakness, according to contemporary sentiment in evolutionary biology,
undermines the relative effectiveness of Dennett’s predictive strategy.
According to current trends in evolutionary biology, the assumption that
evolution creates optimal systems is not a secure one.
I. Evolutionary Biology and the Assumption of Optimality
Certain strands of this contemporary thought can be seen in the
work of Steven Gould and Richard Lewontin. Gould and Lewontin relay
an anecdote given by a colleague of Herbert Spencer’s on the origin of
fingerprints:
1 Dennett 17.
HOWPREDICTABLE
It was obvious, he said, that the delicate mouths of the sudorific
glands required the protection given to them by the ridges on either
side of them, and there from he elaborated a consistent and ingen-
ious hypothesis at great length. I replied that his arguments were
beautiful and deserved to be true, but it happened that the mouths
of the ducts did not run in the valleys between the crests, but along
the crests of the ridges themselves.4
This anecdote illustrates that although an adaptive story can be told to
explain why a particular feature of an organism exists as it does, it does not
follow that the story told is necessarily true. Recently, much has been done
to dispel the idea that evolution can be explained simply by telling stories
about an all-powerful process of adaptation through natural selection,
through which all traits are given their form. We know that other factors
do come into play in evolutionary processes, some of which do not con-
cern natural selection at all.
The dismissal of the idea that all evolutionary processes can be
explained through the fabrication of stories about an all-powerful selective
process leads us to a second, related point, a point upon which much
energy has already been spent. Evolutionary processes do not necessarily
work to optimize particular traits. This is the case for three reasons:
1) Evolutionary processes are not always powerful enough.
2) Evolutionary processes may not work on a particular trait at all.
3) Even when evolutionary processes do work on a particular trait,
they may do so through some mechanism unrelated to natural selec-
tion (which isjust a particular mechanism of evolution). These other
mechanisms will provide no guarantee of optimality.
In response to these claims, Dennett adopts and defends the view
generally called adaptationism. Dennett defends this stance in his critical
essay in The Intentional Stance, “Intentional Systems in Cognitive Ethology:
The Panglossian Paradigm Defended.” Dennett’s defense of adaptation-
ism rests on the concept that adaptive explanations arenecessary for par-
ticular traits, because they cannot, in non-adaptive terms, answer
important questions regarding the purpose of various traits and character-
istics. His defense will be examined here.
CARLBROWNSON
Various significant problems arise with adaptationism, particularly
in regard to the features of the human mind. One major problem, as sug-
gested above, is that there is empirical evidence that many of the features
of the human mind are simply not adaptations. The ability to read is a
prime example. Because there was never an episode in the history of
humanity when the survival of the species depended on its members’ abil-
ity to read, reading is not an adaptation. We have brains that developed
for other purposes, and only in the last few thousand years were those
brains applied to the interpretation of written symbols. This type of func-
tion (though they never explicitly mention reading) is what Gould and
Lewontin refer to as a ‘spandrel’. Spandrels are those features which are
“secondary utilization of parts already present for reasons of architecture,
development, or history.”5 Nothing can be directly claimed in evolution-
ary terms about such features’ optimality, since these features are not pres-
ent solely due to their capacity to promote survival. They are essentially
present accidentally.
Further, even those features that are historically likely to be adap-
tations through natural selection can quite often fail to be optimal fea-
turesin their present utility. For example, humans generally crave fats and
sugars. It is very likely that at some point in our history, these cravings
were a positive adaptation, as those humans who stored fats and sugars
were more likely to survive winters without central heating than those that
did not. Therefore, these people would have reproduced and become a
majority of the population. Now, however, cravings of (widely available)
fats and sugars remain a feature of many humans, in a manner that is far
from optimal. Those cravings are, in fact, a leading cause of early death in
contemporary (Western) society.
As seen above, certain traits and behaviors may admit or reject adap-
tive explanations. Explanations concerning the nature of our brains often
lead to the same conclusions when subsumed under the adaptationist the-
ory. It seems almost sure that the development of our large brains them-
selves was an adaptation. We have noidea, though, how they became this
2 Dennett 28.
3 Dennett 33, emphasis added.
4 Gould and Lewontin 88.
5 Gould and Lewontin 85. They are named ‘spandrels’ after a certain form of architectural “left-
HOWPREDICTABLE
large and complex. Similarly, it is likely that particular basic functions
such as language and emotional processes were adaptations, but determin-
ing exactly how this came about is speculative work at best.6 Many other
functions are even more controversial in origin, and if these likely “span-
drels” are notadaptations, then speaking about them in terms of optimal-
ity seems impossible, at least from an evolutionary standpoint, and the
evolutionary standpoint isthe standpoint Dennett takes.
Dennett’s particular defense of adaptationism (or, as he calls it in
the title of the relevant chapter in The Intentional Stance, “the
Panglossian Paradigm”)7 rests on the idea that adaptationism can pro-
vide explanations regarding the features of organisms that a non-adapta-
tionist approach cannot. As he puts it, “One has not yet answered the why
question posed when one has abstemiously set out the long (and in fact
largely inaccessible) history of mutation, predation, reproduction, selec-
tion—with no adaptationist gloss. Without the adaptationist gloss, we
won’t know why.”8This claim follows an earlier charge of hypocrisy leveled
against Gould and Lewontin in which he suggests that they actually are
espousing a “recommendation that we should all be more careful and plu-
ralistic adaptationists.”9 Dennett implies that Gould and Lewontin will
have to ultimately reject their “adaptationtist view” if their positions are to
remain coherent.
In response to Dennett’s claim, Gould and Lewontin refer to the set
of unsubstantiated adaptive reasons (the “why” questionsabout traits) as
“Telling Stories.” Telling stories is problematic for two reasons. First,
the method is unfalsifiable: “Since the range of adaptive stories is as
wide as our minds are fertile, new stories can always be postulated.”10
Second, stories are often accepted for less than adequate reasons.
Plausibility, consistency, and coherence to a pre-established set of beliefs
are often enough to merit the acceptance of an adaptive story. If a non-
adaptationist approach cannot answer the “why” questions we want
over,” in which the primary features of a certain dome leave spaces, or “spandrels.” The particu-
larly imaginative artwork on these spandrels might lead the viewer to believe that the spaces
were created explicitly for the artwork. In fact, the spaces are first and foremost an architec-
tural byproduct, regardless of their later use.
6 Sterelny 328–32.
7 Gould and Lewontin first call adaptationism the Panglossian Paradigm, after Voltaire’s Dr.
CARLBROWNSON
answered, then perhaps those questions are just out of our reach at the
present time. A non-adaptationist evolutionary pluralist can have plenty of
“why” answers, where there are actual good, adaptive, “why” answers; how-
ever, if there are no such answers to be found, it is prudent to accept that
and avoid “story-telling”.
Lacking an all-powerful mechanism of adaptation through a natural
selection that acts on every identifiable trait, we lack the optimality that
Dennett’s predictive strategy needs. Based on adaptionism, Dennett’s
strategy requires a mechanism that ensures the optimal development of
various traits and features. Working sometimes, on some traits, natural
selection will not provide such a mechanism. As seen above, the optimality
of certain traits (reading, for example) may not be the result of natural
selection. The trait(s) remaining as a result of natural selection is not
necessarily optimal. Furthermore, numerous essential traits completely
escape the influence of natural selection. Thus we see that as the adap-
tationistic ice becomes increasingly thin, Dennet’s predictive strategy
begins to lose its support.
II. Suboptimal Behavior and the Intentional Stance
Dennett’s strategy is based on a third-person perspective. He
assumes that “we can see more and better if we start here, now, than if we
try some other track.”11 From this perspective, obviously, it is going to be
difficult to know exactly what people in the first-person perspective are
going to do. Thus, he needs to have some mechanism to get from pure
speculation about what people in that first-person perspective believe and
desire to what they actually believe and desire. As a result, his method
requires the predictor to attribute only those beliefs and desiresthat the
agent “ought to have”; this is the only place where the predictor and the pre-
dicted have much chance of meeting on those beliefs and desires. According
to Dennett, true believers are the only people with whom this meeting actu-
ally occurs. Surely people believe things suboptimally all the time. I will
come back to this problem shortly.
Using this mechanism, however, the agents who possess the beliefs
HOWPREDICTABLE
they “ought to have” will obviously not meet. Dennett requires a common
set of “oughts” between predictors and agents in a large number of situa-
tions for his intentional strategy to be of much use. This large common
set is provided by a belief that we are optimal, and so will predict each
other well enough and behave well enough of the time to guaranteea large
number of meetings. As we have seen, however, the evolutionary mecha-
nism on which he relies for that optimality will not necessarily provide it.
What, then, happens to Dennett’s strategy when people do behave
suboptimally? Stephen Stich posed this problem to Dennett: in particular,
the problem of people making mistakes. “If we…trade up,” he says, “to the
intentional-systems of notions of belief and desire…then we simply would
not be able to say all those things we need to say about ourselves and [oth-
ers] when we deal with each other’s idiosyncrasies, shortcomings, and cog-
nitive growth.”12 Dennett’s system is a predictive mechanism, and so the
response he should give to Stich would be a method through which these
failures of optimality in rationality, memory, or cognitive growth could
be predicted. Dennett claims, instead, that “such errors, as either malfunc-
tionsor the outcomes of misdesign, are unpredictable from the intentional
stance.” He goes on to say that “there will inevitably be an instability or
problematic point in the mere descriptionof such lapses at the intentional
system level—at the level at which it is the agent’s beliefs and desires that
are attributed.”13The determination of exactly what mistake is made in a
case of suboptimal behavior is not easy to come by, and reasons, to name
just a few, can include memory failure, irrationality, and inexperience.
Thus, Dennett gives us an explanation of why such behavior was subop-
timal, after the event, but does not answer how such behavior could
have been predicted before the event (he thinks it could not have); and
he does not give an answer, potentially as useful, as to whysuch behavior
is unpredictable.
I think that the answer to the latter question can be approached
using, in part, another idea that Stich proposes to counter Dennett’s
intentional strategy. Dennett seems to think that there is some set of ideals
that constitute optimally rational, fully in possession of memory, opti-
mally experienced, etc., which intentional systems either approximate or
Pangloss, who was a caricature of Leibniz and his belief that this was “the best of all possible
CARLBROWNSON
do not approximate, and against which such intentional systems can be
assessed in terms of that approximation. The question, “What ought this
person do in this situation?” is asked relative to that set of ideals. However,
Stich proposes that what we are actually asking in that circumstance is,
“What would I do if I were in his place?” Stich claims that “the notion of
idealized rationality plays no role at all,” and that “in ascribing content to
belief states we measure others not against an idealized standard but
against ourselves.”14Dennett responds by claiming, “Measuring [someone]
against ourselves is measuring against an idealized standard.”15
There are at least two reasons for dismissing this response. The first
is that very little guarantee is given that the “ourselves” being measured
against will not fall victim to the unpredictable mistakes that Dennett pre-
viously admitted (unavoidably) do exist. The second is that, without a pow-
erful optimizing force (in the form of adaptationism), such mistakes may
very well be rampant. However, if we admit this suboptimality into the form
of our predictive strategy, we might come a step closer to being able to
predict behavior. Since suboptimality is at least an occasionally present
feature in the behavior of intentional systems, even if it is not rampant
(which it seems, in fact, to be), possible explanations of these sub-optimal
behaviors would seem to merit some attention.
III. Empathy and the Intentional Stance
By illustrating the weaknesses inherent in Dennett’s assumption of
optimality—that is, the inability to assume optimality through natural
selection—we can also see a possible solution to the problem. I propose
that Dennett’s predictive strategy, and any predictive strategy for that
matter, should be based on the assumption that individuals will not act
optimally. As such, the predictive strategy would be directed from the
principle of empathy rather than optimality. According to Stich, state-
ments about what an intentional system ought to do actually take the
form, “What would I do in that situation?” If we transform this question
to say instead, “What would I do in that situation, if I were like him?” we
worlds.” This kind of optimality is necessary for Dennett.
HOWPREDICTABLE
8Dennett 267, emphasis added.
9 Dennett 261.
10 Gould and Lewontin 79–81.
11 Dennett 7.
12 Stich 48.
13 Dennett 84.
14 Stich as quoted by Dennett 99.
15 Dennett 99.
CARLBROWNSON
might be able to drop assumptions of optimal behavior from the picture
entirely. Dennett thinks that suboptimal behavior, although it cannot be
predicted, can be described and that it usually is. However, those descrip-
tions of the reasons for suboptimal behavior can be incorporated into the
belief-desire attribution structure in appropriate ways. If I were to drive
from New Orleans to Los Angeles in one day, and it was important that I
made it for a certain meeting, and I was not as attentive as I usually am,
etc., then I would fall asleep at the wheel. Therefore, I predict that some-
one in this situation will fall asleep at the wheel. There seems to be no rea-
son, given the incorporation of this shared set of human sub-optimal
characteristics, that sub-optimal behavior should be any less predictable
than optimal behavior.
Dennett accepts an optimality-assuming version of an intentional
strategy because it works, and it works because people usually behave in
optimal ways. The practical reason, however, that the strategy works (when
it does work) is not because people approximate optimal levels (as if we
could even describe such levels in concrete terms). Rather, it works in
those cases because the predicted behaviors matchthe behaviors performed
by the predicted agents. Dennett’s strategy works if the predicted people
behave in optimal ways. However, even if people do not act optimally,
then a predictive strategy may still work if the predictions match the behav-
iors of the predicted. Those predictions can be reached using a “What
would I do in that situation, if I were like him?” question. The behaviors
of intentional systems (without the label of optimality) can be predicted
based on people’s actualbeliefs and desires. The burdensome label of “opti-
mal” behavior can, in this case, be discarded.
Discarding the assumption of optimality would seem unavoidable;
we are not optimal beings, as evolutionary theory and common sense
might indicate. Furthermore, we seem to use the empathetic approach
every day, in the same way that Dennett claims that we use the optimal for-
mulation. The idea “I bet that guy’s going to fall asleep on the road,” or
some related sub-optimal prediction, has undoubtedly taken shape at
some point in everyone’s mind. Taking these bad predictions with the
good would require more work—attributing the likely flaws in belief and
desire of particular people at particular times is another potentially com-
plex step—but it seems to work as well as the optimal formulation. Every
day, based on empathy, we predict the actions of others.
HOWPREDICTABLE
Some may continue to think that Dennett’s strategy needshis opti-
mality to function, as there would presumably be no starting point for pre-
dictions without it. I do not think this is the case, for the reasons stated
above. Malfunctions and design imperfections are pervasive in human
beings, and there seems to be a large question concerning what optimal
people would even look like. Granting that we all share this set of maladies
and shortcomings, some empathetic thinking should be able to give us the
same starting block that Dennett seeks with his predictions of optimal
behavior. The question “What would I do in that situation, if I were like
him?” is useful, because to a large extent the predictor will be like the pre-
dicted, much more than either one of them willbe like an optimal human.
For this reason, the empathetic approach gives a better chance for the kind of
matching between predicted behavior and actual behavior Dennett needs for
his strategy to work than optimality does.
Optimality, then, is a major problem in Dennett’s theory.
Evolutionary theory would require an adaptationist reading to support
optimality, and there are many reasons to reject an adaptationist version of
evolutionary theory. Further, an adaptationist reading would require the
glossing over of such primary features of our behaviors as reading, given
that reading and many other behavioral features are not adaptations but
spandrels. Yet many of these behaviors are central and deserve explanation
in some terms, if not adaptationist ones. Most importantly, it seems as
though intentional predictions can be and often are made accurately using
a strategy that does not incorporate optimality at all. For these reasons, I
think that Daniel Dennett’s Intentional Stance would be stronger without
the assumption of optimality.
CARLBROWNSON
References
Dennett, Daniel. The Intentional Stance. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1987.
Gould, Steven and Lewontin, Richard. “The Spandrels of San Marcos and
the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptionist
Programme.” Proceedings of the Royal SocietyB205 (1979): 581–98.
Sterelny, Kim and Paul Griffiths. Sex and Death. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1999.
Stich, Stephen. “Dennett on Intentional Systems,” Philosophical Topics 12
(1981): 38–62.