AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
Divine Foreknowledge and Changing the Past
ARI D. BRUENING
WHEN confronted with the apparent incompatibility of infallible,
exhaustive divine foreknowledge (hereafter simply “foreknowl-
edge”) with human libertarian freedom, the average proponent
of foreknowledge responds with the claim that “God’s foreknowledge
doesn’t cause my actions. What makes me not free?” Philosophers gener-
ally reject such a response because the problem of the incompatibility of
freedom and foreknowledge is not a causal problem but rather a logical
problem. What hinders me from performing certain actions is the logical
incompatibility of (a) my performing that action and (b) God’s having
always infallibly believed that I will not perform that action. Are these
conditions, however, logically incompatible after all? I argue that there is
no logical incompatibility involved; instead, incompatibilists1 need to
appeal to an ontological assumption that, while enjoying intuitive sup-
port, is not a logical truth.
I. Logical Incompatibility
The philosophically uninitiated compatibilist wants to know what it
is that forces us to act in a certain way. In other words, when we say that we
do not have the power to do something, we usually mean that some obsta-
1 I use the term ‘incompatibilist’ to refer to those who deny the compatibility of libertarian
human freedom and infallible, exhaustive divine foreknowledge. ‘Compatibilist’, conversely, will
Ari D. Bruening, a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University,
will attend Harvard Law School this fall. This essay won first place in the 2002
David H. Yarn Essay Competition.
ARID. BRUENING
cle to our doing so exists. For example, if I do not have the power to speak
Cambodian, it could be due to a number of reasons: I might not have the
requisite knowledge or I might be physically constrained. In the case of
divine foreknowledge, what is it that restrains me from acting freely?
The incompatibilist will respond that God’s having always infallibly
believed that I will do a certain thing logically precludes my acting any
other way. This is similar to saying that I am not free to draw a square cir-
cle because it is logically impossible. If it is the case that God has always
believed that I will not go to bed at midnight, I do not have the power to
go to bed at midnight because it is logically impossible that I do so. The
two cases, however, seem on the face of them to be very different.In the
case of drawing a square circle, the logical impossibilityis very straightfor-
ward: drawing a square circle violates the law of non-contradiction. In
fact, a square circle is such a meaningless and contradictory concept
that my inability to draw one does not seem tobe much of a limitation. I
am simply not able to do something that makes no sense.
In the case of my bedtime, however, going to bed at midnight does
not seem absurd at all, whether God believes that I will or not. If God
believes that I will not go to bed at midnight, and yet I do, it simply
seems that He was wrong. God, however, is never wrong; therefore such
a situation is contradictory, an incompatibilist will say. But before the
situation can be contradictory and absurd, the incompatibilist has to
add several premises that can easily be questioned. A square circle is con-
tradictory simply in virtue of the definitions given to ‘square’ and to ‘cir-
cle’, but foreknowledge and freedom require something more: assertions
about the nature of time itself.
II. The Inalterability of the Past
Let us look at a good example of the argument for incompatibility as
it has been advanced by Blake Ostler. The argument as he illustrates it is
very complete and easy to follow:
(a) It has always been true that agent Pwill freely choose to perform
action xat a future time tand it is possible to know this truth at all
times (from the omnitemporality of truth).
(b) God cannot fail to believe anything that is true and cannot believe
anything that is false (from God’s omniscience).
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
(c) God has always believed that agent Pwill freely choose to perform
action xat time t(from (a) and (b)).
(d) It is not in anyone’s power to change God’s past belief (from the
inalterability of the past).
(e) It is not in agent P’s power to change God’s past belief that Pwill
do xat t(from (c) and (d)).
(f) If Pdoes not perform xat t, then God did not always believe that
Pperforms xat t(from (b)).
(g)Therefore, it is not in agent P’s power to refrain from performing x
at t(from (e) and (f)).
(h) If agent Pacts freely when he performs xat t, then it is within P’s
power to refrain from performing xat t(from the definition of liber-
tarian freedom).
(i) Therefore, Pdoes not act freely when Pperforms xat t(from (g)
and (h)).2
This argument is valid—if we accept all the premises, we must accept
the conclusion. Note, however, that this argument depends on much more
than simple definitions and mathematics. It requires strong assertions
about the nature of time, omniscience, freedom, and logic. Although I will
focus upon the possibility of changing the past (premise (d)), I will also
deal with each of the other assumptions made in the argument above.
III. Fatalism
The argument above for theological fatalism is closely related to an
age-old argument for logical fatalism.3This is because the existence of true
propositions concerning future contingent events seems to contradict
libertarian freedom in the argument for incompatibilism above whether
God knows the truth of all future propositions or not. Consider this alternative
refer to those who affirm such compatibility.
2Adapted from Ostler 192–93. William Hasker presents a similar, though less complete, argu-
ment. See Hasker 69.
3Theological fatalism is the idea that exhaustive infallible foreknowledge precludes libertarian free-
ARID. BRUENING
argument:
(a) It has always been true that agent Pwill freely choose to perform
action xat a future time t(from the omnitemporality of truth).
(b) It is not in anyone’s power to change the past (from the inalter-
ability of the past).
(c) It was true in the past (say at time t|) that agent Pwill freely choose
to perform action xat time t(from (a)).
(d) It is not in agent P’s power to change the truth of the past propo-
sition that agent Pwill perform xat t(from (b) and (c)).
(e) If Pdoes not perform xat t, then it was always true that Pwill not
perform xat t(from omnitemporality of truth).
(f) Therefore, it is not in agent P’s power to refrain from performing x
at t(from (d) and (e)).
(g) If agent Pacts freely when he performs xat t, then it is within P’s
power to refrain from performing xat t(from the definition of liber-
tarian freedom).
(h) Therefore, Pdoes not act freely when Pperforms xat t(from (f)
and (g)).
In this argument, if it was true in the past that I will eat pancakes
tomorrow, then that past proposition cannot be changed. This means that
I am not free to refrain from eating pancakes tomorrow. God’s knowledge,
it seems, is not a necessary part of the argument for fatalism. Logically, if
past propositions about the future are true and if the past is unchangeable,
then the future is also unchangeable; no agent is thereforefree. This is the
argument for logical fatalism made famous by Richard Taylor among oth-
ers.4
It seems to follow that revising our definition of omniscience (prem-
ise (b)) is insufficient to overcome fatalism. We may be tempted to revise
our definition to assert that an omniscient being knows everything that is
knowable, with the intention of including future contingents in the cate-
gory of truths that are unknowable, but if we want to maintain both the
dom. Logical fatalism is the idea that the truth of future-tense propositions precludes liber-
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
omnitemporality of truth and the inalterability of the past, such a revision
is insufficient. If we want to maintain that we are free in a libertarian
sense, we must assume either that it is possible to change the past in some
sense, or that contingent statements about the future are neither true nor
false (or, alternatively, simply false). Either route will work, although deny-
ing the omnitemporality of truth involves denying a central tenet of tradi-
tional logic.
Blake Ostler takes the alternate route: he argues that past proposi-
tions can be changed in a manner in which past events cannot.5 This
means that, while I cannot change God’s past belief that I will eat pan-
cakestomorrow, I can change the past proposition that I will eat pancakes
tomorrow, as long as no one knows the truth of the proposition.
Ostler’s argument, however, contradicts his own analysis of the
necessity of the past. The very same reasons that Ostler gives for the neces-
sity of past events can also be applied to the necessity of past propositions:
It is certainly contradictory to assert that ‘Lincoln delivered the
Gettysburg address in 1863’ is now true but that someone could
bring it about that ‘Lincoln did not deliver the Gettysburg address in
1863’ is also now true.… Not even an omnipotent being can change
the past. To make this latter statement true, God would have to undo
many past events and make many statements that are now true to be
false.6
The meat of Ostler’s argument for the necessity of the past seems to be
that it is impossible to “make many statements that are now true to be
false.” Thus, if it is now true that Lincoln gave the Gettysburg address in
1863, it is impossible to make it subsequently true that Lincoln did not
give the Gettysburg address in 1863. The argument, however, applies to
past propositions as well; if it is now true that ‘Bob will eat pancakes
tomorrow was true yesterday’, it is impossible to make it subsequently
true that ‘Bob will eat pancakes tomorrow was not true yesterday’.
Ostler offers no reason why past necessity should not apply to past propo-
sitions in this way.
tarian freedom.
ARID. BRUENING
Nevertheless, a large number of contemporary theologians and
philosophers agree with Ostler that it is possible to change the truth value of
past propositions about the future. When it comes to an actual event, how-
ever, such as God’s knowledge, many argue that it is impossible to change
the event in question.7 What is it about actual events that differs from the
truth value of propositions? I will explore these issues in the next two sec-
tions, arguing that there is no logical impossibility involved in changing
God’s past beliefs.
IV. Changing the Past
Certainly, we have intuitions about the impossibility of changing the
past. We normally feel that, while the future is open to unlimited possibil-
ities, we can do nothing to alter the past, no matter how much many of us
would like to do so. But is it the case that every aspect of the past is inal-
terable? Until we can determine the nature of the inalterability of the past,
we cannot resolve the question of the compatibility of divine foreknowl-
edge and human freedom. We should note, however, that the problem of
incompatibility here is not simply a logical one at all, but an ontological
problem concerning the nature of time.
One limitation that we must face in resolving the issue of the inal-
terability of the past is the limited capacity of human language for dis-
cussing the ontological existence of God. Our language is based upon (and
even partially determines) our experience of the world as mediated by
4 See, for example, Richard Taylor’s works “The Problem of Future Contingencies” and
Metaphysics 35–67.
5Ostler 192.
6Ostler 191, italics removed.
7I am assuming that God’s knowledge is an event. David Hunt claims that God’s past beliefs can
be changed because ‘belief’ is an equivocal word. Thus, God’s believing something does not nec-
essarily entail a physical event. If I know or believe that today is Tuesday, it does not follow that
I ever consciously think that today is Tuesday. What follows is only that I have the capacity to con-
sciously realize that today is Tuesday if I think about it. Thus, the fact that God believed in 1945
that I would write this paper in 2002 does not entail that God consciously thought in 1945
about my writing this paper. Although Hunt’s argument avoids theological fatalism, his version
of foreknowledge is useless. For God’s foreknowledge to be useful for Him, He must conscious-
ly think about the future; my knowledge that it is Tuesday is useless for me unless I am faced
with a situation in which I consciously realize what day of the week it is, e.g. when I wake up
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
sense experience. Most of us feel, however, that God is not limited by lan-
guage nor by human sensory experience; He likely experiences events in a
much different way than we do, a way that we cannot possibly claim to
understand or to know. Those who presume to limit God’s experience of
time through finite human language and intuitions should pause to recon-
sider whether their claims are more presumptuous than they intend them
to be.8
That said, I will attempt to present some ideas about our understand-
ing of the nature of time as we experience it. Do we have any reason to sup-
pose that it is possible for me to act in such a way that, were I to do so, God
would never have held a belief that He in fact did hold? Initially, each of us
would say no, but I will present some reasons for believing that such action
might in fact be possible.
We should begin by examining what exactly it might mean to
change the past. First, it could mean either that we could act in such a
way as to bring about something that did in fact happen or in such a way
as to prevent something from happening that did not happen. The possi-
bility of such actions has been questioned, but they will take a back seat
here to another way of changing the past that must be defended in order
for compatibilists to justify their position: we might be able to change the
past in the sense that we act in such a way as to bring about something that
did not in fact happen or in such a way as to prevent something from hap-
pening that did in fact happen. If we can defend these two ways of chang-
ing the past, we can save the first two, weaker ways of bringing about the
past.
One may respond that we do not actually need to be able to change
the past; instead, we only need to be able to bring it about in the first sense
mentioned. This response, however, does not fit with the commonly
accepted definition of libertarian freedom. Under this definition, in order
to be truly free with respect to going to bed at midnight I must both have the
power to go to bed at midnight and to refrain from going to bed at mid-
night. If God has always believed that I will not go to bed at midnight, then
in order for me to go to bed at midnight without proving God wrong, I
in the morning and remember what I need to do today. So it is with foreknowledge.God may
not have consciously thought in 1945 that I would write a paper in 2002, but He must have con-
ARID. BRUENING
must have the power to bring it about that God always believed that I will
go to bed at midnight, thereby altering a belief that God has always held.9
A possible objection is that I need not have the power to change
God’s beliefs because I will never exercise it. In taking such an approach,
however, while still maintaining that I am free with respect to going to
bed, we must compromise our definition of freedom by rejecting liber-
tarianfreedom in favor of soft determinism. Soft determinists define free-
dom as the ability to do what we want to do. While we are free to act upon
our desires, however, we are not necessarily free to choose what our desires
are. By accepting soft determinism we can maintain human freedom, but
it is a much watered-down version of human freedom. Before we ever act,
it is already determined what we will do—we have no realfree choice in the
matter. Granted, we are free from external compulsion, but we are still not
truly free in the sense that most of us want to believe.
Ostler gives an excellent example to show the counter-intuitive
nature of this kind of freedom.10 In this example, a group of scientists
place a device in the brain of a subject named Rock that allows the sci-
entists to manipulate Rock’s desires. When the scientists want a candy
bar, they cause Rock to desire to steal a candy bar. Rock then acts upon
this desire. Of course, most people would say that Rock is not morally
responsible for his actions because he was not free. According to soft deter-
minism, however, he was free; he was free to act upon his desire. The source
of his desire does not enter into the freedom equation. Thus, Rock should
be morally responsible (if anyone who freely commits a crime should be
morally responsible) for his actions.
If we are free only to act upon our desires, God could easily become
the cause of all our actions. Thus, our desires determine our actions, and
God in turn determines our desires. This view of freedom preserves an
extremely strong notion of divine providence, but it is both counter-intu-
itive and inconsistent with the strong notion of libertarian freedom that
we are seeking to preserve. In order to maintain libertarian freedom
sciously thought sometime in the past that I would write this paper; otherwise, His foreknowledge
has been entirely useless. Foreknowledge thus becomes, at some point in the past, a physical
event.
8I am not here arguing that God is atemporal. It is not incompatible to assert that our past, pres-
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
with respect to our actions, we must assert that we are both able to per-
form and to refrain from performing an action, regardless of which
course we choose. If God has infallible, exhaustive foreknowledge, then
we must be able to bring about a change in His past beliefs.
Changing the past in the sense of bringing it about must be differ-
entiated from causing the past. During everyday life, we bring about many
things that we would not say that we had caused; nevertheless, the occur-
rence of the events that we bring about is dependent upon our own
actions. For example, by speaking to Bob I bring it about that Bob believes
that I spoke to him, but we would not want to say that I had caused his
belief. Similarly, the jailer who gave poison to Socrates may have caused
Socrates’s death, and he may have brought about Socrates’s widow’s
mourning, but he did not cause the latter’s mourning.
The first of these examples, involving Bob’s belief, is particularly
important for our examination, for this is exactly the kind of bringing
about that we mean when we say that we could bring about God’s past
belief. Hence, we do not need to affirm retrocausation in order to affirm
the possibility of bringing about God’s past belief. Perhaps, as William
Craig suggests, although it is possible to bring about the past, the impos-
sibility of retrocausation is responsible for our intuitions about the inal-
terability of the past.11 What we are asserting when we assert that our
actions can bring about God’s past belief is not that causal chains can run
backwards, but that what God believes is partially dependent upon what
we do in the future.
V. The Nature of Time
The question remains, however, whether it is possible to act in such
a way that God did not believe what He in fact did believe. I can see three
reasons why we would say that we cannot change the past, none of which
seem to be insurmountable for the special case of divine foreknowledge.
These reasons include the possibility of circularity, the problem of mem-
ory, and intuitions about time.
The possibility of circularity is the possibility that something I do in
the present will affect the past in such a way that it is impossible for me to
ARID. BRUENING
have done what I did in the present. For example, I could do something
that brings about the death of my parents before I was ever born.
Conversely, I could bring about something in the past that is the condi-
tion of the possibility of my action in the present. For example, I could
travel to the past and through some kind of technology become both of my
own parents.
Such causal loops are devastating to a theory of bringing about the
past, but not in the special case of divine foreknowledge. Divine fore-
knowledge per se does not create any kind of causal loop; God must act
in some way on the basis of His foreknowledge in order to cause prob-
lems of circularity. Alvin Plantinga, for example, suggests that we can
make a decision so monumental that “if God had foreseen that you
would choose that alternative, he would have acted very differently.
Perhaps he would have created different persons; perhaps, indeed, he
would not have created Abraham.”12 But what if the person who acted
in such a way as to bring it about that God did not create Abraham is
herself a descendent of Abraham? Even if we grant that God acts provi-
dentially in the world based upon His foreknowledge, however, I see no
reason to assume that God is not intelligent enough to avoid such prob-
lems. Divine providence based upon His foreknowledge is a very compli-
cated issue that is beyond the scope of this paper, but I see no reason to
assume that God could not avoid causal loops.
The second problem with altering the past is the phenomenon of
memory. I currently remember that Queen Elizabeth has been Queen of
England for my entire life. What if, however, I were to do something that
would bring it about that Queen Elizabeth never became queen? Are my
memories suddenly wiped out? The consequences for much of the world
would be enormous; my entire life might be greatly affected. Such a sce-
nario seems implausible and seems to cast doubts upon the possibility of
changing the past.
As long as we never experience the results of God’s beliefs, memoryis
not a problem. Certainly we never directly experience His beliefs; unless
God acts in some certain way according to His foreknowledge or directly
reveals His beliefs to us, the problem of memory can never be an issue. To
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
what extent we experience the results of divine action on the basis of fore-
knowledge is the subject, once again, for another paper. The scriptural
examples of prophecy, however, often seem to be examples of God’s reveal-
ing to mankind His knowledge about future freely chosen events. What if
Christ prophesied that Peter would reject Him three times, but Peter
freely chose to reject Him only twice? Peter’s free action would change
Christ’s past belief, which presumably would also change His prophecy.
What then happens to Peter’s memory of the original prophecy?
A very adequate response is that it is also possible to change past
memories. When Peter’s action brings about a change in the past, it
becomes the case that Christ never made the original prophecy; instead,
He prophesied that Peter would only deny Him twice. Since Christ never
made the original prophecy, Peter never remembered it. The only case in
which memory might become a problem is a case in which the memory of
the person involved is required for the possibility of her action. For exam-
ple, if Christ’s prophecy was the motivation for Peter’s not denying Him the
third time, but Peter’s not denying Him obliteratedthe prophecy, we seem
to find ourselves in a circle similar to those already discussed. Once again,
we must assume that God is intelligent enough to avoid such circles.
A second option is to see prophecy in a different way. Richard
Rice, who does not accept exhaustive divine foreknowledge, explains
prophecy in three ways. First, God can unilaterally bring to pass
any prophecy he makes. Second, “a prophecy may also express God’s
knowledge that something will happen because…nothing could conceiv-
ably prevent it.”13 In other words, God might see that some outcome is
inevitable. Finally, prophecies can be contingent; for example, a city will
be destroyed if the people do not repent.14Christ’s prophecy to Peter could
fall into any one of the three categories.
We have at least two routes, then, to explain prophecy: we can
either bite the bullet and admit that our memories can change or we
can alter our conception of prophecy. It seems that there is no reason to
think that the problem of memory is an insurmountable problem for
compatibilists.
The third objection to bringing about the past involves our intu-
ent, and future can be simultaneously present before God and that God experiences time. God’s
ARID. BRUENING
itionsabout the nature of time. Two dominant theories of time exist: the
A-theory and the B-theory. According to the A-theory of time, only the
present is actual; the past is no longer actual, and the future is not yet
actual. According to the B-theory of time, however, past, present, and
future are all equally actual. Time thus acts as a fourth dimension. Bill
Hasker writes of the B-theory of time that “all of time exists ‘simultane-
ously’, as a sort of four-dimensional solid in the space-time continuum,
with only human consciousness marking the distinction between ‘now’ and
‘then’.”15
The A-theory seems to be the more common-sense theory of the
two. We experience the past as something that once was but is nowirre-
trievably gone, while the future is not real except in the sense of myriad pos-
sibilities. Nevertheless, we should not be so arrogant as to assume that we
have a pristine view, as if through an unspotted window, of the world—
especially of time—as it is in itself. As already noted, our experience is
mediated by language and sensory processes. The modern Einsteinian pic-
ture of the universe seems to imply a B-theory of time; the special theory
of relativity posits a “relativity of simultaneity” in which the simultaneity
and even time of occurrence of events depends upon the observer. Given
this type of relativity of past and present, it doesn’t take much for the
imagination to conclude that past, present, and future depend upon the
observer. Upon the death of his friend Michele Besso, Einstein wrote to
Besso’s son and sister: “He has preceded me briefly in bidding farewell to
this strange world. This signifies nothing. For us believing physicists the
distinction between past, present, and future is only an illusion, even if a
stubborn one.”16
Although there appear to be flaws to Kurt Gödel’s “proof,” using
Einstein’s equations, of the possibility of time travel,17 modern physics
seems to present good reason to accept a B-theory of time. We certainly
should not reject the theory out of hand simply because of our everyday
experience of time—particularly when we are speaking about the experi-
ence of a divine personage whose experience of time we cannot claim to
time may simply be a different time.
9Hasker points out that compatibilists must affirm the possibility of changing the past in the
DIVINEFOREKNOWLEDGEANDCHANGINGTHEPAST
fully comprehend.
As we have seen, there are no convincing reasons to accept the logi-
cal impossibility of bringing about or changing God’s past beliefs. It is not
necessary that we actually change God’s past beliefs; in order to maintain
libertarian freedom, we have only to maintain that it is possible for us to
change His beliefs. Of course, from our perspective we would never be
able to know that we had changed God’s beliefs; we would say that God
had simply known beforehand what we were going to do. I could say, for
example, that God had always known that I would go to bed at midnight,
but that, had I not gone to bed at that time, He would havebelieved other-
wise.
I have not dealt much here with the issue of divine providence (the
use God makes of His foreknowledge), but I think that I have shown that
there is no logical incompatibility between exhaustive infallible foreknowl-
edge and human libertarian freedom. Until incompatibilists can find a con-
vincing argument against changing the past in the special case of divine
foreknowledge, compatibilists need not surrender to claims that human
freedom and divine foreknowledge are logically incompatible.
Incompatibilists’ strongest supportable claim is that accepting divine fore-
knowledge requires us to reject certain common-sense intuitions about the
nature of time. Forcing human intuitions about time onto God, however,
is an anthropomorphic move that compatibilists do not need to accept.
sense I have described, but he never offers an argument against such a possibility. Instead, like
ARID. BRUENING
most philosophers (including compatibilists), he simply assumes that changing the past is impos-
sible. See 96–143.
10Ostler 203–04.
11Craig 191.
12Plantinga 257.
13Rice 51.
14Rice 50–53.
15Hasker 127–28.
16Hoffmann 257–58.
17See Craig 140–41.
ARID. BRUENING
References
Craig, William Lane. Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom. The
Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1991.
Hasker, William. God, Time, and Knowledge. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1989.
Hoffmann, Banesh. Albert Einstein: Creator & Rebel. New York: Penguin
Books, 1972.
Hunt, David P. “Does Theological Fatalism Rest on an Equivocation?”
American Philosophical Quarterly32 (1995): 153–65.
Ostler, Blake T. Exploring Mormon Thought: The Attributes of God. Salt Lake
City: Greg Kofford Books, 2001.
Plantinga, Alvin. “On Ockham’s Way Out.” Faith and Philosophy3 (1986):
235–269.
Rice, Richard. “Biblical Support for a New Perspective.” The Openness of
God. Clark Pinnock, et al. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press,
1994.
Taylor, Richard. Metaphysics. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1992.
———. “The Problem of Future Contingencies.” Philosophical Review 66
(1957): 1–28.