AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
On Being a Self:
The Individuality of Possibility and the
Possibility of Individuality
RYAN G. CHRISTENSEN
Part of Kant’s reason for writing the first Critiqueis to show the lim-
its of theoretical reason; one of these limits is its inability
to experience transcendence, to cognize supersensible objects, to
intuit the sublime. But Kant doesn’t thereby want to make these experi-
ences impossible—indeed, part of his reason for writing the second and
third Critiques, along with such works as Religion within the Limits of
Reason Alone, is to show how such experiences are possible. Kant locates
the possibility of transcendence within his discussions of practical rea-
son: Transcendence, impossible from a speculative point of view,
becomes possible from a practical point of view. It is Kant’s analysis into
this possibility that allows him to link the two halves of his dualistic self,
and shows that transcendence, far from being impossible, is necessary to
individuate a self.1
18:142–43; see also A640/B668–A642/B670. References to Kant’s works will be to the page num-
bers in the AkademieEdition. References with Aor Bfollowed by a page number indicate refer-
ences to the first Critique; references beginning with the numeral 4 are to the Groundwork of the
Metaphysics of Morals, those with 8 are to “What Does it Mean to Orient Oneself in Thinking?”
and those with 9 are to the Jäsche Logic. Both the second and third Critiquesare in volume 5 of the
AkademieEdition, so references to these works will also be indicated by CRand CJ, respectively.
Ryan Christensen studies philosophy at Brigham Young University, and will begin
his Ph.D. this fall at Stanford. This essay was awarded second place in the 2002
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
I
Kant assumes that it might be possible to have an experience of the
divine:
If I come across an immediate intuition of such kind that
nature…could not provide that intuition, then a concept of God
must serve to gauge whether this appearance agrees with all the char-
acteristics required for a Deity.… Rational faith must come first, and
then certain appearances or disclosures could…provide the occasion
for investigating whether we are warranted in taking what speaks…to
us to be a Deity.2
Even in the first Critique, Kant makes it clear that practical reason is
capable of intuiting the supersensible: “There is an absolutely necessary
practical use of pure reason (the moral use), in which reason unavoidably
extends itself beyond the boundaries of sensibility.”3
Jean-Luc Marion also argues for the possibility of our experience of
transcendence, but tries to locate that possibility within speculative rea-
son. Marion calls this experience a “saturated phenomenon,” a phe-
nomenon not bound by the normal phenomenological limitations.
According to Marion, Husserl’s “principle of all principles” is too
restrictive to allow for supersensible or saturated phenomena.4 Instead
of ignoring the limits of the Husserlian principle, Marion wishes to
examine the possibility of a phenomenon at the borders of these limits.
Thus, the possibility of a saturated phenomenon might allow a new
analysis of possibility and so question some of the foundations of phe-
nomenology.
Marion suggests that such a saturated phenomenon sheds light
above all on possibility:
By subjecting the phenomenon to the jurisdiction of possibility, phi-
losophy in fact brings fully to light its own definition of naked possi-
All italics are in the original.
28:142–43.
3Bxxv. Kant uses the term transcendent because such experiences transcend speculative reason:
“In a word, these three propositions [freedom of the will, immortality of the soul, and existence of
God] always remain transcendent for speculative reason....Their importance must really concern
only the practical” (A799/B827–A800/B828).
ONBEINGASELF
bility. The question concerning the possibility of the phenomenon
implies the question of the phenomenon of possibility.5
Marion begins with a definition of ‘possibility’ he gets from Kant:
“Whatever agrees with the formal conditions of experience (in accordance
with intuition and concepts) is possible.”6Marion focuses on formal adher-
ence to the concepts and to intuition, and not, thereby, intuition itself. He
concludes his discussion with his working definition of ‘possibility’, one
he seems to hold as a paraphrase of Kant: “Any phenomenon is possible
that grants itself to the finitude of the power of knowing and its require-
ments.”7But in this definition, Marion seems to ignore important points
of Kant’s analysis of possibility.
For Kant, as for Marion, possibility is determined by the formal con-
ditions of experience. But for Marion, these conditions are limited solely
to the concepts and to intuition, where for Kant the formal conditions
include both the “theoretical” sources (intuition and concepts) and the
“practical” sources (the moral law). In his preface to the second edition,
he clarifies that theoretical reason is not uniquely constitutive of possibil-
ity:
To cognizean object, it is required that I be able to prove its possi-
bility.… [And] in order to ascribe [real possibility] to such a con-
cept…something more is required. This “more,” however, need
not be sought in theoretical sources of cognition; it may also lie in
practical ones.8
By trying to locate experience of the supersensible within theoretical
possibility, Marion seems doomed to failure. Kant says as much repeat-
edly: “All attempts of a merely speculative use of reason in regard to theol-
ogy are entirely fruitless and by their internal constitution null and
4This principle limits the givenness of the phenomenon by making it reducible to the Iand
always inscribed within a horizon of meaning.
5Marion 177.
6A218/B265; see Marion 177–78.
7Marion 178.
8Bxxvi. Likewise, the Jäsche Logicstates, “We have…certain cognitions, and in fact completely a
priori, in practical laws, but these are grounded on a supersensible principle…and in fact in us our-
selves, as a principle of practical reason” (9:68n). Elsewhere Kant withholds the name ‘cognition’
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
nugatory.”9 But Marion’s failure to acknowledge Kantian practical possi-
bility is not extraordinary. Since Kant’s most extended philosophical treat-
ments of possibility are within his Critique of speculative reason, most of
his discussions of possibility focus on speculative possibility.10Paul Guyer
comes close to recognizing the importance of practical possibility, drawing
an “analogy” between the logical/real distinction and Kant’s proof for the
possibility of the categorical imperative in the Groundwork for the
Metaphysics of Morals.11
In the second Critique, Kant seems unclear how to talk about practi-
cal possibility, making some confusing and seemingly contradictory asser-
tions. For example, in a parenthetical remark meant to clarify the meaning
of ‘postulate of pure practical reason’, Kant says, “By [this] I understand a
theoreticalproposition, though not one demonstrable as such, insofar as it
is attached inseparably to an a priori unconditionally valid practicallaw.”12
A few pages later, Kant seems to distinguish speculative reason from theo-
retical reason, though he elsewhere uses the terms synonymously:
Because practical reason unavoidably requires the [postulates of prac-
tical reason, which are the existence of freedom, immortality, and
God]...theoretical reason is justified in assuming them. But this
extension of theoretical reason is no extension of speculation, that is,
no positive use can be made of it for theoretical purposes.… Hence this
disclosure does not help us in the least for speculative purposes,
although with respect to the practical use of pure reason it does help
us to extend this cognition of ours.13
What Kant means when he distinguishes an “extension of theo-
retical reason” from an “extension of speculation” is unclear, for he
immediately again uses the terms as synonymous. It may be that he is
here confused; certainly a species of pure reason is justified in assuming
the practical postulates, but not pure theoretical (or speculative) reason.
Hence he is saying that pure reason must assume the practical postulates,
from practical reason: “Rational faith, which rests on a need of reason’s use with a practical
intent…is not inferior in degree to knowing, even though it is completely different from it in
kind” (8:141).
9A636/B664.
10See particularly A218/B266–A224/B272.
ONBEINGASELF
but this extension of pure reason is not an extension of theoretical reason;
no use can be made for theoretical purposes, though for practical pur-
poses the postulates are essential.
Kant concisely describes “practical cognition of reason” as “making
the object actual.”14That the objects must be made actual implies that they
are only practically possible. For example, the kingdom of ends “is a prac-
tical idea for the sake of bringing about...that which does not exist but
which can become real by means of our conduct.”15
Kant divides practical from speculative reason, but seems uncom-
fortable with the gap he thus creates. He needs practical possibility in his
discussions of speculative possibility, and he often depends on speculative
possibility in his practical proofs. One of the purposes of the third Critique
is to connect speculative and practical reason through teleological judg-
ment. Regardless of the success of this argument, practical and speculative
reason are connected through Kant’s conception of the self and personal
identity. This makes room for some rich investigations into what it means
to be a self.
II
With this discussion of practical reason, Kant acknowledges the tra-
dition of philosophical possibility begun by Aristotle. For Aristotle, possi-
bility (dynamis) is essentially active: its primary meaning is “a source of
movement or change [kinesis],”16and it is derived from the word dynasthai
(“being able”). Aristotle is the first to see the connection between being
and possibility: “Being is...distinguished in respect of possibility and actu-
ality [energeia].”17
Aristotle’s dynamis is a complex notion; he acknowledges that
11Guyer 180–84.
12CR5:122.
13CR5:134–35. Commenting on this passage, Guyer says, “The unexpected concession he grants
with one hand is immediately taken back with the other” (338n).
14Bx.
154:437n.
161019a15.
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
“dynamis and dynasthai have several senses.”18 Graham identifies three:
dynamis-action (DA), dynamis-power (DP), and dynamis-substance (DS).19
Aristotle himself often conflates DA and DP,20 and the distinction is not
important to our discussion here.
But Aristotle seems to think dynamis in this sense to be somewhat
philosophically uninteresting: “Let us first explain dynamis in the strictest
sense, which is, however, not the most useful for our present purpose. For
dynamis and actuality extend beyond the cases that involve a reference to
kinesis.”21 Aristotle equates dynamis (DS) with matter and actuality with
substance or form.22 Thus he maps his early ontology of the categories
onto a new metaphysics of possibility and actuality,23 making actuality
identical with being.24This leads him to say that “actuality is prior to pos-
sibility [dynamis].”25
Like Aristotle, Heidegger focuses on active possibility, but unlike
Aristotle he affirms that “higher than actuality stands possibility.”26 Like
Kant, he recognizes logical possibility, but dismisses it as “empty.” He like-
wise dismisses “modal possibility,” which he characterizes as “contingency
of something objectively present,” and defines as “what is not yet real and
not alwaysnecessary.”27In this sense, according to Heidegger, possibility is
really a form of actuality; thus, as with logical possibility, this is not the pri-
mary sense. Heidegger is most concerned with possibility as an existential:
“possibility as an existential is the most primordial and the ultimate posi-
tive ontological determination of Dasein.”28Being is identified with possi-
171045b34–36, translation altered. Plato presents, in the mouth of the Stranger in the Sophist,
the following definition of being: “I offer it as a definition of beings [ta onta] that they are pos-
sibility [dynamis], and nothing else” (247e4, translation altered). But it is controversial whether
this is actually a definition that either the Stranger or Plato would accept (see Owen 229–30n).
181046a4.
19 See Graham 183, 199–200. Ross counts five in his translation of Aristotle’s lexicon in
Metaphyicsv (1019a15–33). Aristotle, however, sees some of these as “equivocal” (1046a6). Ross
reduces the five definitions to two primary senses (see Graham 200). It is probably Ross’s identi-
fication of DA and DP that leads him to translate dynamisas “potency.”
20See Graham 205.
211045b37–1046a3.
22See 1050b2.
23This is what, according to Graham, causes the inconsistencies of Metaphysicsvii. See Graham
207ff.
24Cf. 1028b3, 1050b2.
251049b5, translation altered.
ONBEINGASELF
bility: “Dasein is not something objectively present which then has as an
addition the ability to do something, but is rather primarily being-possi-
ble. Dasein is always what it can be and how it is its possibility.”29
Kantian practical possibility is thus like Heidegger’s existential possi-
bility and Aristotle’s dynamis-A in that it is essentially active. But the focus
of the first Critique is on speculative possibility, the brand of possibility
more suited to Kant’s epistemological and metaphysical claims, and, it
seems, to Marion’s phenomenology. These two concepts of possibility
might seem almost completely unrelated—as separate, in fact, as meta-
physics and epistemology are from ethics and aesthetics. Surely we equivo-
cate in confusing the possibility of an object with the possibility of an
action. Surely, that is, when I say, “It is possible for me to go to the store”
(which may involve notions of free will), I use possibility in a different
sense than when I say, “A three-sided plane figure is possible” (which
involves only appearings).
Many philosophers, including Kant, are uncomfortable with this
division. Guyer sees the practical postulates as “part of the moral psychol-
ogy that Kant was developing in all the major works of his final decade of
philosophical activity.”30 Marion likewise may be relying on the slogan of
his predecessor Emmanuel Lévinas that ethics precedes metaphysics.
While Kant would certainly not say that ontology is reducible to
ethics, his metaphysics is motivated by his concern for morality: “I had to
deny knowledgein order to make room for faith; [because] the dogmatism of
metaphysics…is the true source of all unbelief conflicting with morality.”31
The relationship between practical and speculative possibility, as with
practical and speculative reason, is complex, but essential to make this
connection between metaphysics (of nature) and morality.
26Heidegger 38. References to Being and Timerefer to the page numbers in the original German
edition. I use Stambaugh’s translation throughout, but do not hyphenate Dasein.
27Heidegger 143. Kant characterizes possibility as “the synthesis of various representations with
the conditions of time in general,” and necessity as “the existence of an object at all times”
(B184/A144–B184/A145).
28Heidegger 143–44. Heidegger contrasts the term existential with category: “We shall call the
characteristics of being of Dasein existentials. They are to be sharply delimited from the determi-
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
III
For Kant, possibility is always individual. Kant speaks of “the sum
total of all possibility,” but then asserts that this is only an “idealof pure rea-
son.”32 Possibility must be individual—according to Kant, for example,
light and darkness are not possibilities to a blind person.33Even if the cat-
egories are universal (as Kant claims), experience and (thus) intuition are
not. Likewise with practical reason: though the moral law is the same for
everyone, adherence to the moral law is not so universal. This is according
to the very nature of ethics, insofar as it treats not how people act but how
they ought to act. Thus, according to both the theoretical and practical
conditions for cognition, possibility is not universal but individual.
Marion quotes part of a passage in which Kant acknowledges the
individual nature of possibility. The full quotation is as follows: “The cate-
gories of modality [including possibility] have this peculiarity: as a deter-
mination of the object they do not augment the concept to which they are
ascribed in the least, but rather express only the relation to the faculty of
cognition.”34This language is similar to that which Kant uses in his argu-
ment that being is not a predicate: “Being is obviously not a real predicate,
i.e., a concept of something that could add to the concept of a thing.”35
Thus possibility is, like being, not a predicate—that is, not the property of
an object or phenomenon.
Any attribute can serve as a logical predicate if a complete and exclu-
sive list can be constructed of its membership. This is why logical possibil-
ity cannot be a predicate. As Cantor proved, such a set would have to be
both larger (have greater cardinality) and smaller than its power set. So no
set of all logical possibilities can be constructed, as the membership of
such a set is indeterminate.
Real speculative possibility fails to be a determinate set for quite
another reason. Because possibility is based on experience, the list of pos-
sibilities cannot be complete as long as one could have further experi-
nations of being of those beings unlike Dasein which we call categories” (44). Thus, possibility as
an existential means possibility defined otherwise than in terms of the categories (as is Kantian
speculative possibility).
29Heidegger 143.
30Guyer 336–37.
ONBEINGASELF
ences. Here the Kantian and Heideggerian concepts of possibility merge,
since, according to Heidegger, the items in a determinate list of possibili-
ties are no longer real possibilities, but “something objectively present.”36
Thus, to make a determinate set of possibilities is just to make possibility
impossible, to deny there is real possibility.
For example, if I could list all the really possible things that could
happen to me tomorrow, I would have to be omniscient. I might be able to
list all the things I am likely to do (go to the grocery store, write a philoso-
phy paper, eat pancakes), but there are bound to be (at least) a few things I
miss. The list will be (at least countably) infinite—it is certainly within the
limits of real possibility for me to be hit, for example, by any of the aster-
oids in the universe. But if I really am omniscient, then I will know what
will happen to me tomorrow. There really won’t be any possibilities: just
one as-yet unrealized actuality. That is, I would have no real possibility.
Thus, even on a purely logical analysis, Kantian speculative possibil-
ity intersects active, practical possibility. My ability to experience objects
depends on the indeterminacy of my being, which relates to my ability to
act. One cannot speak of universal possibility, only of the possibility of an
individual self. An individual is thus surrounded by a halo of possibility, a
halo which, in defining the individual’s possibilities, defines the individ-
ual.
Individuation does not occur merely on the basis of the transcen-
dental ego—the ego is necessary but not sufficient for the creation of indi-
viduals. Kant argues that the move by which we empirically determine the
existence of external objects is also the move by which we empirically
determine the existence of an enduring self: “The determination of my
existence in time is possible only by means of the existence of actual things
that I perceive outside myself.”37That is, the self is determined empirically
and in relation to the external world.
This is the thrust of Kant’s distinction between inner sense and
apperception—inner sense is a kind of sensibility and hence a form of intu-
ition: “Through inner sense we intuit ourselves only as we are internally
affected by our selves, i.e., as far as inner intuition is concerned we cognize
our own subject only as appearance but not in accordance with what it is
31Bxxx.
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
in itself.”38Kant sees that we cannot observe our inner state without in the
same act changing our state—when I pause to examine the content of my
thoughts, that act in itself changes the content of my thoughts, at least by
introducing that examination among my thoughts. Through the transcen-
dental unity of apperception, on the other hand, “I am conscious of
myself not as I appear to myself [as with inner sense], nor as I am in myself,
but only thatI am.”39Apperception involves the recognition of persistence
of the subject through changes in the object; it recognizes the self as a self
only because it is essentially other than the objects of the world: “The con-
sciousness of my own existence is at the same time an immediate con-
sciousness of other things outside me.”40
This conclusion is similar to one of the major points of Marion’s
argument. Marion begins by investigating the possibility of an object that
does not comply with Kant’s requirements of speculative possibility—that
the object agree with the concepts and intuition.41 He acknowledges that
within the scope of mathematics and physics, an object that does not meet
these requirements would truly be impossible: “This phenomenon quite
simply would not appear; or better, there would not be any phenomenon
at all.”42 He defines the saturated phenomenon as identical with the “aes-
thetic idea” of Kant’s third Critique: “an intuition…
for which an adequate concept can never be found.”43Just as Kant speaks
of the sublime as being absolute,44Marion says, “Intuitive saturation, pre-
cisely inasmuch as it is…absolute (unconditioned), imposes itself in the
capacity of a phenomenon that is exceptional by excess, not by defect.”45If
a saturated phenomenon were to appear, it would not be reducible to an
object. Conversely, if there is an appearance that is not objectifiable, that
32A573/B601–A574/B602.
33A575/B603.
34A219/B266. Insofar as intuition forms part of it, the faculty of cognition is individual. Thus, the
possibility of, say, an object comes from its having a certain relation to an individual’s categories
and intuition.
35A598/B626.
36Heidegger 143.
37B275–76.
38B156.
39B157.
40B276.
ONBEINGASELF
appearance is a saturated phenomenon.
The excess of intuition prohibits the self from mastering the appear-
ance, from reducing it to concepts. Because of this, Marion says, “Far from
being able to constitute this phenomenon, the Iexperiences itself as con-
stituted by it.”46 That is, “It becomes a me rather than an I.”47 The self is
more than a transcendental ego; it is always also an immanent me. But this
is a familiar point: in one sense it is nothing more than the idea that the
self is both noumenal and phenomenal, an idea in which Kant locates his
discussion of free will.
In another sense, however, Marion’s claim may be new. He seems to
ignore the necessarily individual nature of possibility, asking only if a satu-
rated phenomenon is possible, never asking for whom it might be possi-
ble.48 But, since it is the saturated phenomenon that constitutes the I,
endowing a transcendental ego with the power of possibility, of change,
and hence of selfhood, this saturated phenomenon must by definition
appear within every halo of possibility. Marion does not, in the end,
ignore Kant’s discussion of the individual nature of possibility, but is only
concerned with what is by definition within the halo of possibility of every
individual—that without which there are no individuals.
Guyer also resolves the difficulties in Kant’s discussions of the possi-
bility of the practical postulates on Kant’s conception of the self:
The possibility of believing in the actual existence of theoretically
indemonstrable conditions…lie[s] at the deepest level of the dualistic
conception of human nature that underlies Kant’s moral psychol-
ogy.… The postulates of pure practical reason, like the aesthetic
experience of beauty as a symbol of the morally good, are products of
human psychology that can be used by the moral will.49
By “dualistic conception of human nature,” Guyer means primarily
the idea that we are all both sensible and rational beings, and this dualism
41Marion, of course, does not distinguish speculative and practical possibility.
42Marion 209. Marion goes on to say that, instead of a phenomenon, there would be an “object-
less perceptive aberration.” This, however, cannot be what he really means, as it assumes that all
intuitions are perceptive (which is not the case with mathematical objects, those which Marion
calls “poor” phenomena). It also begs the question of appearance: nothing, not even an aberra-
tion, appears with a truly impossible object. To assume there is an aberration is already to assume
there is something which is not reducible to an object.
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
forces reason to “nurture every means to the performance of our duty that
sensibility affords, such as the natural feelings of beauty and the sub-
lime.”50It is experience of the beautiful and the sublime that unite the two
halves of the self, in which the philosophical notions of possibility also
merge.
The saturated phenomenon can only be a condition of individua-
tion if it is not prohibitively uncommon. Marion thus wants to reverse
what he sees as Kant’s giving “privilege” to “logical and mathematical phe-
nomena,” claiming, “it is not self-evident that this marginal poverty could
serve as a paradigm for phenomenality as a whole.”51Instead, he asserts,
The saturated phenomenon must not be understood as a limit case,
an exceptional, vaguely irrational, in short, a “mystical,” case of phe-
nomenality. On the contrary, it indicates the coherent and concep-
tual completion of the most operative definition of the
phenomenon.… And—we insist on this—here it is purely and simply a
matter of the phenomenon taken in its fullest meaning.52
Marion thus wants to take the saturated phenomenon as the most
basic experience. It is the saturated phenomena that give meaning to our
everyday experiences, not the reverse.
I have consciousness of myself as an individual only back as far as my
earliest memories. Marion classifies “pure historical [that is, memorable]
events” as the first type of saturated phenomenon.53 Insofar as an experi-
ence is remembered, it is not fully objectified; it is thus by definition satu-
rated. My dawning consciousness as a child coincided with my acquisition
of concepts and thus experiences that transcended those concepts. These
early transcendent experiences, and all that have followed, together make
me who I am.
In addition to pure historical events, Marion calls Descartes’s idea of
infinity by the name of the saturated phenomenon. He also cites Kant’s
notion of the sublime and adds experiences of art, love, and the divine
to the list of saturated phenomena.54 These experiences endow an indi-
vidual with a halo of possibility, and thus with selfhood. As Kant says,
43CJ5:342; see Marion 195–96.
44CJ5:248.
45Marion 209.
ONBEINGASELF
“True sublimity must be sought only in the mind of the judging per-
son.”55
The purpose of practical reason is to make the possible actual.
Thus, whereas inner sense only cognizes the self as appearance, appercep-
tion, which is direct intuition of the self, “self-actively” makes the self
actual.56Both practical and speculative reason are involved in the identity
of the self.
Kant’s division of speculative from practical possibility leads to sev-
eral problems that he can only resolve by combining the two notions. But
the division goes right to the heart of Kantian dualism, and is thus only
resolved by the union of the dualism of the self. It is among Kant’s cen-
tral concerns in his work on ethics, aesthetics, and politics near the end
of his life to examine what it is to be a self and thus how to reconcile the-
oretical and practical reason.
46Marion 210.
47Marion 211.
48Kant, on the other hand, is very concerned with this individuality: “A pure rational faith is
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
therefore the signpost or compass by means of which the speculative thinker orients himself in his
rational excursions into the field of supersensible objects; but a human being who has common
but (morally) healthy reason can mark out his path” (8:142).
49Guyer 336.
50Guyer 366.
51Marion 189.
52Marion 212–13.
53Marion 215.
54Marion 213–15.
55CJ5:256.
56B68.
RYANG. CHRISTENSEN
References
Aristotle. Metaphysics. Trans. W. D. Ross. The Basic Works of Aristotle. Ed.
Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941. 681–926.
Graham, Daniel. Aristotle’s Two Systems. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.
Guyer, Paul. Kant on Freedom, Law, and Happiness. Cambridge: University
Press, 2000.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Trans. Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1996.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Judgment. Trans. Werner S. Pluhar.
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1987.
———.Critique of Practical Reason. In Practical Philosophy, 133–272.
———. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood.
Cambridge: Univesity Press, 1997.
———. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. In Practical Philosophy,
37–108.
———. The Jäsche Logic. Trans. J. Michael Young. Lectures on Logic.
Cambridge: University Press, 1992. 521–642.
———. Practical Philosophy. Ed. Mary J. Gregor. Cambridge: University Press,
1996.
———. “What Does it Mean to Orient Oneself in Thinking?” Religion
within the Boundaries of Mere Reason and Other Writings. Trans.
Allen Wood and George di Giovanni. Cambridge: University
Press, 1998. 3–14.
Marion, Jean-Luc. “The Saturated Phenomenon.” Trans. Thomas A.
Carlson. Dominique Janicaud et al. Phenomenology and the
“Theological Turn”: The French Debate. New York: Fordham University
Press, 2000. 176–216.
Owen, G.E.L. “Plato on Not-Being.” Plato I: Metaphysics and Epistemology.
Ed. Gregory Vlastos. New York: Anchor Books, 1971. 223–267.
Plato. The Sophist & The Statesman. Trans. A. E. Taylor. London: Dawsons
of Pall Mall, 1971.