Aporia vol. 10 no. 2—2000
What Is a Rule? An Analysis of Rules and
Music in Wittgensteinian Thought
Erin M. ClinE
Even in music, the art for which Wittgenstein had the
greatest feeling, he showed above all a great understand-
ing . . . When he played music with others . . . his interest
was in getting it right, in using his acutely sensitive ear
to impose upon his fellow musicians an extraordinary
exactitude of expression. One could even say that he was
not interested in creating music, but in re-creating it.
(Monk 240)
The tremendous affinity Ludwig Wittgenstein exhibited for music is
undeniable. His interest in re-creating music is an expression of the
blending of this affinity and the concept of rules within his philo-
sophical work. It is evident from the manner in which he integrated music
into the body of his work that music not only occupied a primary position
within his life, but also was present in his thought process. Wittgenstein
insisted upon the fact that there had been six great composers: Haydn,
Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms, and Labor, and their music
permeated his life and his mind (Monk 8). Wittgenstein’s work regarding
rules illustrates the presence of music within his philosophy. Wittgenstein’s
discussion of how one learns a rule is indicative not only of what a rule is,
but of the impossibility of providing an analytic definition for it, and the
necessity of the use of examples both in learning rules and in understand-
ing what they are. Furthermore, the implications of this discussion can
be accurately depicted using examples from the compositions of Haydn,
Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, and Brahms, and within the music of these
composers, Wittgenstein’s manner of doing philosophy is embodied.
The introduction of music into Wittgenstein’s philosophical explora-
tion of language is justifiable not only as a result of its intricate involve-
ment in his life, but also due to the evidence of it in Wittgenstein’s work.
16 Erin M. ClinE
“Understanding a musical phrase may also be called understanding a
language,” he wrote (RPP2 par. 503). Wittgenstein exhibited his belief in
this principle through repeated utilization of music as a device with which
to describe the concept of language. Wittgenstein approaches language
primarily through the notion of a language-game, in which he finds the
analogy of the rules of language and the rules of games particularly produc-
tive. The concept of a rule, in Wittgenstein’s work, is a family-resemblance
concept, which indicates that there is no essence to rules, only common
features or resemblances (PG 116–17). Thus, the pursuit of a definition of
a rule is futile, but the discovery of a rule’s features is best displayed by the
process in which we learn those rules.
The comparison of speaking language to playing a game is funda-
mental to the apprehension of the manner in which rules are learned.
Wittgenstein compares the game of chess to the speaking of language:
speaking to playing chess, words to chess pieces, explanations of words
to the rules of chess, and meanings of words to the powers of chess pieces
(Baker 154). In consideration of Wittgensteinian musical tendencies, this
concept can be productively employed musically: speaking is like playing
a Beethoven sonata, words are notes, explanations of words are the rules
of music (largely the relationship of notes in a score to hand movement,
according to Wittgenstein) and meanings of words are the powers of
symbols indicating such things as dynamics and tempo. They are put to
use both in deciding and recognizing how to play the composition and in
playing it, and so they are in a sense transparent to the musician.
Due to the fact that an analytic definition cannot be provided for a
family-resemblance concept, Wittgenstein asserted that rules are a concept
best explained by examples (Glock 324). Parallel to this is the fact that
individual rules are learned primarily by example. Wittgenstein states that
we learn the meaning of a word by example, and the grammatical position
of words is provided by such examples (PG 118). He says, “For doesn’t the
technique (the possibility) of training someone else in following it belong to
the following of a rule? To be sure, by means of examples . . . How do you
follow the rule?—’I do it like this; . . . ‘ and now there follow general explana-
tions and examples” (RFM 418). Wittgenstein provides another example:
“a gesture, a tone of voice, as in which the teacher uses in a particular
way in giving instruction, and which the pupils imitate” (RFM 348). In
addition, he points to instances in which one is not actually told the rules
but learns the rule “by watching others play” (PI pars. 31, 54).
The use of the phrase “do the same” is a function of teaching a rule
by example: “I shall teach him to use the words by means of examples . . . I
do it, he does it after me; and I influence him by expressions of agreement,
rejection, expectation, encouragement” (PI par. 208). Wittgenstein
What is a rulE? 17
describes the use of the words “rule” and “same” as interwoven because
the rule is the determining factor for what is considered “doing the same”
in this instance (PI par. 225 and RPP2 par. 408. ). The student has learned
the rule when she is able to follow the example and “do the same.”
If a musical instructor is teaching a student the rule of dynamics
using Brahms’ “Waltz in A Flat,” the instructor may best impart the rule
by playing the crescendo for the student, progressing from pianissimo to
forte and then back again to pianissimo. The student will learn the rule
of dynamics by concurrently following the dynamic notation in the text
visually, and aurally noting the corresponding volume change in the notes.
Regarding the analysis of the manner in which one learns a rule, it
is essential to ascertain that one has, in fact, learned the rule. How does
the instructor confirm that the student has learned the rule? Wittgenstein
addresses this in reference to the consequent action taken by the student:
“he exclaims ‘Now I can go on!’—So this capacity, this understanding, is
something that makes its appearance in a moment” (PI par. 151). He also
evaluates the significance of this ability: “my being so certain of being able
to go on is naturally very important” (RFM 37). One who is able to “go
on” has been trained to take the same step their instructor took when he
encounters a scenario in which the rule is present. Thus, the student’s
understanding is “manifest in his actions” (Baker and Hacker 97).
“The word ‘agreement’ and the word ‘rule’ are related,” according to
Wittgenstein: “The phenomena of agreement and of acting according to
a rule hang together” (RFM 344). The fact that the student’s actions are
in agreement with the instructor’s exemplary actions is an indication that
the student has learned the rule. However, Wittgenstein is careful to point
out that “one does not learn to obey a rule by learning the use of the word
‘agreement.’ Rather, one learns the meaning of ‘agreement’ by learning to
follow a rule.” Wittgenstein says this process is “the phenomenon of a kind
of instruction, of shewing how and of imitation.” True to his focus upon
the implications of language, he points to the use of the term “and so on,”
saying it can only be used “when the other is as capable of going on as I
am, i.e., does go on just as I do” (RFM 405, 345, 349). It would be nonsensi-
cal for the instructor to use the term “and so on” unless the student had
learned the rule.
Wittgenstein says, “the pupil shews that he is using the rule we have
given him to pass from the printed to the spoken words” (PI par. 162).
Likewise, in music the student shows that he has learned the rule when he
uses it to pass from the printed rule in a score to playing the music in ac-
cordance with the rule. Beethoven’s Sonata in C Minor Op. 13 “Pathetique,”
the most famous of his early piano sonatas, applies one of Haydn’s compo-
sitional practices in the employment of the brooding, slow introduction.
18 Erin M. ClinE
It is recalled twice in later stages of the first movement and requires a
keen understanding of tempo. In this case, the student displays the fact
that he has learned the rule of tempo by playing the introduction at the
slow tempo each time it is recalled. The student has thus learned to apply
the rule of playing the correct tempo in the same way it was applied by
Beethoven when he composed Pathetique. This is further supported by a
statement Wittgenstein made in regard to the meaning of a word during a
1939 lecture in Cambridge: “To know its meaning is to use it in the same
way as other people do” (Malcolm 171).
A proper analysis of the Wittgensteinian concept of rules requires a
determination of what “following a rule” is. Wittgenstein emphasizes the
importance of the learning process in regard to this: “What the correct
following of a rule consists in cannot be described more closely than by
describing the learning of ‘proceeding according to the rule’” (RFM 392).
Wittgenstein also articulates the fact that rule-following is related to ability
(PG 188 and PI par. 495). To comprehend a rule, one must be able to
determine what acts are in accord with it and be capable of defending his
behavior if called upon to make it intelligible. The conclusion that one
is capable of following a rule, or of guiding himself by reference to a rule
can be drawn when he explains his actions by citing the rule, conducts a
self-evaluation when he fails to follow the rule and corrects himself accord-
ingly. Thus, “to understand a rule is to be master of the technique of its
application” (Baker and Hacker 159, 45, 161).
Schubert’s “Moment Musicaux No.3,” with an expansive melody and
evocative harmony typical of Schubert’s piano sonatas, requires a particu-
larly acute understanding of the rule of staccato notes.26 In order to play
the composition correctly, the student must recognize the symbol that
denotes this rule in the written notation and exhibit understanding of its
meaning in his playing. By displaying the ability to do this, the student
exemplifies a mastery of the technique of following a rule.
Comprehension of the relationship between one’s understanding of
a rule and the action in which one follows it is particularly significant
to Wittgenstein’s conception of a rule. Wittgenstein writes, “Only in the
practice of a language can a word have meaning” (RFM 344). Likewise,
only in the practice of following a rule can one understand its meaning.
This concept is somewhat confusing to comprehend, because in scenarios
in which the scientific method is applied, the opposite is true. One can
gather and understand data without accepting or understanding the hy-
pothesis. However, one’s understanding of a rule is not independent of
how it is applied in one’s actions (Baker and Hacker 97). If one is mistaken
about what a rule is, one is also mistaken about what following a rule is.
What is a rulE? 19
An excellent illustration of this relationship is exemplified in the
student’s understanding of the rule of time signatures within Haydn’s
“Andantino,” a composition exhibiting Haydn’s inexhaustible originality.
If the student does not comprehend the implications of having six beats
in a measure with the eighth note getting the beat, she will be mistaken in
the way she plays the piece. It would be incorrect to assert that the student
could follow the rule and play in 6/8 time if she did not understand the
rule of 6/8 time.
The connection between understanding and following a rule
supports Wittgenstein’s assertion that a word’s meaning is its use in the
language (PI 43). The application of a rule embodies its meaning, like the
application of a word embodies its meaning. In search of a definition for
a rule, one may attempt to look further, not realizing that the rule is un-
derstood in the process by which it is followed. Wittgenstein’s comments
regarding the function of a rule illustrate this:
But how can I explain the nature of a rule to myself? The difficult
thing here is not, to dig down to the ground; no, it is to recognize the
ground that lies before us as the ground. For the ground keeps on giving
the illusory image of a greater depth, and when we seek to reach this, we
keep on finding ourselves on the old level. Our disease is a disease of
wanting to explain. (RFM 333)
In reference to the question of what a rule is, Wittgenstein’s comments
support the learning-based inquiry: “Once you have described the
procedure of this teaching and learning, you have said everything that can
be said about acting correctly according to a rule” (RFM 392). He further
expounds upon this view using a specific example: “What ‘determining
the length’ means is not learned by learning what length and determining
are; the meaning of the word ‘length’ is learnt by learning, among other
things, what it is to determine length” (PI 225). Applying this specifically
to the question of a rule, one could conclude that what a rule is cannot
be learned by searching for the essence of “rule,” for it does not possess
an essence, nor can it be clarified by formulating an analytic definition.
Rather, the meaning of “rule” is learned by learning what it is to follow a
rule. By this standard, the line of inquiry exploring the process of learning
rules by examples and the meaning of following a rule is productive.
When Wittgenstein describes the process of teaching one to follow a
rule, he describes teaching by example, and elaborates on the description
with the following remarks: “Does this mean that ‘following a rule’ is inde-
finable? No. I can surely define it in countless ways. Only definitions are of
no use to me in these considerations” (RFM 321). One could define a rule
as “a standard of correctness,” or “a standard which governs a multiplicity
of occasions,” but as Wittgenstein points out, these definitions serve no
20 Erin M. ClinE
purpose. The question “What is a rule?” is best answered in the analysis
of examples because the rule “speaks through my application of it” (Pears
441). Not only are individual rules best taught by example, but the concept
of a rule is best taught by example.
As with almost every topic he addresses, Wittgenstein saw strong
correlations between the rules of language and music: “Verbal language
contains a strong musical element,” he stated (RPP1 par. 888). After an
analysis of the concept of understanding through its manifestation in a
picture, Wittgenstein again found music a primary tool for the examina-
tion of language: “Understanding a sentence is much more akin to un-
derstanding a theme in music than one may think . . . Why is just this
the pattern of variation in loudness and tempo? . . . In order to ‘explain’
I could only compare it with something else which has the same rhythm”
(PI par. 527). In his discussion of change of aspect, music is used again as
an illustration: “ ‘You have to hear this bar as an introduction’; ‘You must
hear it in this key’; ‘You must phrase it like this’” (PI 202).
Wittgenstein’s analysis of a rule has far-reaching implications for the
field of philosophy. It was Wittgenstein’s view that the analysis of language
use could clarify concepts, ultimately leading to the solutions of philo-
sophical problems, and that the concept of a rule is central to achieving
these ends. By asserting that a rule cannot be analytically defined, but
must be understood by example, Wittgenstein embraces the technique of
description, as opposed to explanation, which he believes is of tremendous
importance: “We must do away with all explanation, and description alone
must take its place. And this description gets its light, that is to say its
purpose, from the philosophical problems . . . solved . . . by looking into
the workings of our language” (PI par. 109).
It is his contention that philosophers lay down rules, and when they
follow them, “things do not turn out” as they had assumed. Thus, philoso-
phers are entangled in rules of their own making: “This entanglement in
our rules is what we want to understand.” Proper understanding of a rule
helps the philosopher get untangled and leaves everything “open to view”
so that “there is nothing to explain” (PI par. 125–26 and Suter 22, 94). In
this sense, rules are both the source of and the solution to philosophical
problems.
In addition to the implications Wittgenstein’s analysis of a rule has
for the big picture of philosophy, it also impacts his own body of work.
The concept of a rule reinforces Wittgenstein’s analysis of many other
concepts. In the private language argument, one of his contentions is
that private language is an impossibility because rule-following presup-
poses the existence of regular practices (PI par. 258, 265). Also in the
private language argument, his assertion that it is impossible to obey a
What is a rulE? 21
rule privately is supported by the distinction between following a rule and
thinking one is following a rule (PI par. 202).
As discussed previously, the concept that a word’s meaning is its use
in language is illustrated by the presentation of a rule as a concept best
defined by examples; the meaning of a rule is found in its use (PI par. 43).
Perhaps most obviously, the family resemblance concept is illustrated by
rules, supporting his assertion that language has no essence (PI par. 66).
“In my father’s house there were seven grand pianos,” Wittgenstein
once remarked—a reflection of his love of music and the influence it had
upon his character, both of which in turn contributed to the manner
in which he engaged in doing philosophy (Monk 278). Though in fact
there is said to have been only three or four grand pianos at the house,
Wittgenstein’s extensive knowledge and deep connection to music is
evident. The six composers whom he considered “great” were the only ones
he considered great, a fact confirmed by his behavior when he attended a
concert featuring the music of Brahms, Strauss, Beethoven, and Bach. A
friend in attendance with him reported that Wittgenstein “enjoyed the
Brahms, refused to go in for the Strauss, and left the hall as soon as the
Beethoven had finished” (Monk 61).
Wittgenstein’s philosophy manifests some of the most unique char-
acteristics of their music. Brahms concerned himself largely with creating
music of “inherent unity” while utilizing unusual effects to enhance the
internal structure of his compositions. Wittgenstein’s concepts do have
unity, and his unusual technique of presenting them in aphorisms ulti-
mately strengthens their viability. The compositions of Schubert tend
to establish a balance between the intellectual and emotional levels of
interpretation while displaying bold, free forms instead of set patterns.
Likewise, the writing of Wittgenstein along with his style of teaching
is indicative of both the intellectual and emotional aspects of human
thought, and certainly is possessive of a bold, free format. Haydn’s balance
of directness and bold experimentation in his compositions transformed
instrumental expression in the eighteenth century, just as Wittgenstein’s
work has transformed philosophical expression in the twentieth century.
Perhaps the characteristics one encounters in a study of Wittgenstein’s
philosophy are most effectively illustrated by Mozart’s Rondo alla Turca,
with its lively and dramatic contrasts in tempo and tone. In reference to
change of aspect, Wittgenstein wrote, “The reinterpretation of a facial
expression can be compared to the reinterpretation of a chord in music,
when we hear it as a modulation first into this, then into that key” (PI
par. 536). The repeated modulations between minor and major keys in
Rondo embody not only Wittgenstein’s words here, but the multiple layers
of thought and understanding that must be examined in his work.
22 Erin M. ClinE
The composer he held in highest esteem is of particular importance
in this illustration, for Wittgenstein argued that “if he is to behave like
Beethoven, he ought, like Beethoven, to produce really great work” (Monk
89). In addressing the concept of the dawning of an aspect, Wittgenstein
says: “I have a theme played to me several times and each time in a slower
tempo. In the end I say ‘Now it’s right’, or ‘Now at last it’s a march’, ‘Now
at last it’s a dance’” (PI par. 206). Beethoven’s early piano sonatas have
a forceful, bold quality indicative of the extensive process of refinement
they underwent. The manner in which Wittgenstein repeatedly refined
his work and progressed through a concept with clarity of vision is a sign
of the same boldness and determination. Like the theme in Wittgenstein’s
example, both Beethoven and Wittgenstein presented their work repeat-
edly to themselves until, “Now at last”—it became a great work.
Wittgenstein’s work indicates that a rule is not to be understood by
definition, but by examples. The rules of music illustrate this process in
the concepts of learning a rule and following a rule, and in the relation-
ship between understanding and following rules. Brahms and dynamics,
Beethoven and tempo, Schubert and staccato, and Haydn and time
signature serve as examples that not only are indicative of these concepts,
but also illustrate what a rule is. The compositions of Wittgenstein’s “great”
composers also illustrate his philosophy, in which the concept of a rule has
provided far-reaching implications both within his own body of work and
for the entire field of philosophy. Music is a powerful tool for analysis in
regard to these implications, because it forms a bridge between Ludwig
Wittgenstein and his philosophy.
Wittgenstein once described to his mentor, Bertrand Russell, the ad-
miration he had for Russell’s monumental work, Principia Mathematica. He
spoke of its beauty with tremendous feeling, “and said—what was probably
the highest praise he could give it—that it was like music” (Monk 44). In
conclusion, the likeness of Wittgenstein’s work to music is inherently clear,
for in his words, “Uttering a word is like striking a note on the keyboard
of the imagination” (PI par. 6).
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein (With Abbreviations)
PG Philosophical Grammar. Translated by Anthony Kenny, edited by Rush
Rhees, Basil Blackwell, 1974.
PI Philosophical Investigations. 3rd ed., translated by G.E.M. Anscombe,
Prentice-Hall, 1999.
RFM Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. Revised ed., translated by
G.E.M. Anscombe, edited by G.H. von Wright, et al., MIT Press,
1994.
RPP1 Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. Vol 1, translated by G.E.M.
Anscombe, edited by G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright. Basil
Blackwell, 1980.
RPP2 Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. Vol. 2, translated by G.E.M.
Anscombe, edited by G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright. Basil
Blackwell, 1980.
Other Works
Baker, G.P. and P.M.S. Hacker. Wittgenstein: Rules, Grammar, and Necessity.
Basil Blackwell, 1985.
Glock, Hans-Johann. A Wittgenstein Dictionary Oxford. Blackwell Publishers,
1996.
Malcolm, Norman. Wittgensteinian Themes: Essays, 1978–1989. Cornell UP,
1995.
Monk, Ray. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Penguin Books, 1990.
Pears, David. The False Prison: A Study of the Development of Wittgenstein’s
Philosophy, Vol. 2. Clarendon Press, 1988, pp. 441.
Suter, Ronald. Interpreting Wittgenstein: A Cloud of Philosophy, a Drop of
Grammar. Temple UP, 1989.