AporiaVol. 14 number 1—2004
The Limits of Toleration:
Applying Rawls’s Public Reason to
Multicultural Rights
JUSTINCOX
n the last few decades, the increasing pervasiveness of Western culture
I
around the globe has tolled the death knell for cultural distinctiveness as
we previously knew it. American economic interests, in particular, have
done a remarkable job of spreading the symbols of American prosperity
around the world. So well, for example, that the world’s busiest
McDonald’s operates not in the United States, but in the tiny Pacific island
nation of Samoa. Such incredible hegemonic power has lead many in
recent years to call for the enactment of political measures in order to pro-
tect cultures that are now, in terms of power and incidence, in the minority.1
The debate concerning the protection of minority cultures, though, has
also taken place within the political culture of individual states. Those
concerned with the loss of the distinctiveness of minority cultures have
often argued for the granting of multicultural rights. On this view, the indi-
vidual rights of the minority group members are not sufficiently salient to
protect the culture as a whole from the pressure of coexisting with more
dominant cultures. What is needed, then, are special group rights that tran-
scend the individuals’ rights and provide more adequate protection for the
culture’s practices and traditions, or even for its mere existence. Such rights
1The French policy of restricting the amount of foreign media is one example of such efforts.
Justin Cox is a senior majoring in philosophy and political science at WashingtonUniversity
in St. Louis. He has been accepted to Yale Law School, where he will most likely attend after
a year of teaching in Chile.
14 JUSTINCOX
could exempt minority groups from certain requirements or restrictions,
such as compulsory education, military service, or even parts of the Bill of
Rights.
Critics, however, advance a number of arguments against the grant-
ing of multicultural rights. I will be considering one such critique here: that
special group rights could allow cultural groups to oppress, abuse and dis-
criminate within their own groups that are situated within a larger liberal
context. Specifically, women seem to be particularly disadvantaged when
groups are allowed to continue illiberal practices. The purpose of this essay,
then, is to explore the limits of toleration for multicultural rights. After a
discussion of the intrinsic and instrumental value of culture, I shall con-
sider John Rawls’s idea of public reason as a means of determining the
proper limits of toleration. In short, I am going to argue that limits of tol-
eration for multicultural rights ought to accord with the idea of public rea-
son.
I. Value of Culture
Omnipresent yet often seemingly innocuous, the value of culture is
frequently assumed without proper justification or explanation. I will begin
with a discussion of the particular value of culture, be it intrinsic or instru-
mental. I shall argue that although “culture,” generically understood, is
intrinsically valuable, the value of any particular culture is merely instru-
mental.
First, a couple of definitional points: for the purposes of this essay,
the word cultureshall be used to refer to the collection of habits, beliefs, cus-
toms, activities, history, traditions and symbols of an identifiable social
group. Based on this definition of the term there seem to be some homog-
enous cultures that comprise entire political entities (like many of the
nation-states of Western Europe) and other cultural groups, (like Native
Americans), that are subsumed by larger, more dominant cultures.
Culture can be valuable in two obvious respects: intrinsically or
instrumentally. Most commentators seem to argue that culture has intrin-
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 15
sic value because it is necessary for individual autonomy and the leading of
a fulfilling human existence. “Personal autonomy,” according to Marilyn
Friedman, “is self-determination by an individual self, a person.”2
Culture provides individuals with a value set, ideas concerning the pur-
pose of human life, and cultural goods such as customs, religion, and his-
tory. Further, culture serves to root the individual human being to the
larger social sphere by providing an arena within which to self-actualize
through the formation and accomplishing of goals and the creation of
social ties. By providing criteria to evaluate what is valuable and an audience
of relevant peers, the situation of an individual within a culture is what ren-
ders the actions of that person meaningful, significant, and worthwhile.
Culture can never be absent or neutral. Human society necessarily
creates and continually modifies cultural norms, goods and associations, a
point that was thoroughly articulated by social contract theorists such as
Thomas Hobbes and John Locke. All human beings are born into and lead
their lives within a cultural context, whatever it may be. Cultural neutral-
ity is an impossibility, since any development of societal norms will neces-
sarily privilege one conception of morality over all others. Even the
establishment of a minimalist libertarian state with the express goal of fos-
tering as much cultural freedom as possible would fail to achieve true neu-
trality, since this political philosophy must make a number of assumptions
that not all cultures would accept.3
Culture should be properly seen as both a prerequisite for individual
autonomy and a logical and inevitable consequence of the exercise of that
prerogative. Absent from this conception of the intrinsic value of culture is
the idea that any particular culture is necessary for the realization of the
aforementioned benefits. When considering that which culture pro-
vides—namely, individual autonomy—distinctions between the cultures of
Germany, India, and Native American tribes are largely irrelevant, since they
2Friedman 4.
3Such as assumptions about the proper role of the state, the priority of individual liberty, and the
importance of toleration itself.
16 JUSTINCOX
all seem to provide a sufficient arena in which their members may exercise
autonomy. Particular manifestations of cultures have mere instrumental
value in the achievement of the goals of individual autonomy and the lead-
ing of a fulfilling human existence.
I am cognizant of the potentially paradoxical nature of granting cul-
ture as a concept intrinsic value while only assigning instrumental value to
culture in the particular case. The point is less problematic if we keep in
mind that the end worth striving for here is individual autonomy; since
this goal and culture are so inextricably bound, it would be impossible to
grant intrinsic value to one without extending it to the other. Though one
must have a culture to achieve autonomy, any particularculture is merely
instrumental in achieving the end of individual autonomy.
Note one consequence of giving such a dominant role to individual
autonomy in the valuation of culture: when cultural practices seem to
restrict or impede the development of autonomy, it looks as if it would be
difficult to justify them. The pulling apart of the plethora of cultural fac-
tors and competing relevant values can make judgments concerning
whether or not a particular cultural practice is detrimental or beneficial
to individual autonomy very difficult to make with any amount of cer-
tainty.
The primarily Islamic tradition of females covering themselves with
the head-to-toe coverings of the burqa is an example of the inherent diffi-
culty in evaluating the extent to which cultural practices foster individual
autonomy. Critics of the burqa and similar practices, especially critics from
Western cultures, argue that they are physically oppressive with their
weight; psychologically oppressive in that they seem to make women devoid
of distinctiveness; and emotionally oppressive in that they are another man-
ifestation of the efforts of men to perpetuate the subordination of women.
On this view, there is no doubt that such practices would be unjustified in
that they greatly restrict the ability of women to become autonomous.
Defenders of this practice, such as Leila Ahmed, argue the opposite
view: coverings like the burqa actually foster autonomy and liberate women
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 17
for a number of reasons.4 Burqas seem to preclude women from being
viewed as sexual objects, they encourage solidarity with other Muslims,
and they promote the appearance (and perhaps even reality) of piety.
Azizah Y. Al-Hibri, in her discussion of Muslim practices deemed repressive
by Westerners, asks the pointed question, “Why is it oppressive to wear a
head scarf but liberating to wear a miniskirt?” The answer, according to Al-
Hibri, “lies in the assumptions each side makes about the women involved
and their ability to make choices.”5 If our assumptions concerning such
practices are indeed wrong, and the donning of the burqa and the variants
on this practice are actually matters of choice, then they would be com-
pletely justified as a legitimate manifestation of individual autonomy.
Though some are less than sympathetic to the arguments advanced
in defense of the burqa, the example illustrates the inherent difficulty in
judging the effects a cultural practice has on individual autonomy. Such an
evaluation requires careful analysis of both the theoretical arguments and
empirical evidence in order to reach a sufficiently reasonable decision,
including input from cultural insiders. One factor that will undoubtedly
play a large role in such decision-making is consent. Intuitively, it seems as
if our toleration for such cultural practices will be proportional to the
degree of voluntariness. If the donning of the burqa is done voluntarily, it
should be seen not as a restriction on autonomy, but rather a manifestation
of it. Of course, determining how voluntary an action is presents its own
array of empirical difficulties, particularly in the presence of strong forces
of indoctrination or the lack of viable alternatives; nonetheless, voluntari-
ness remains a crucial factor in evaluating the effects of cultural practices
on individual autonomy. I will pick up this theme of voluntariness again
later in my discussion of the importance of viable exit options in any grant-
ing of multicultural group rights.
4Okin 37.
5Ibid. 46.
18 JUSTINCOX
II. Role of Cultural Pluralism
Next, I would like to focus on cultural pluralism as a vehicle for the
benefits of culture. The realization of benefits from culture seems to
require some amount of pluralism. A pluralist society is one in which a
multitude of different cultural groups exist, each respecting the other cul-
tures but maintaining their own distinctiveness.6
If one accepts individual autonomy as the primary benefit of culture,
then illustrating the importance of pluralism becomes much easier. There
are three ways in which pluralism assists autonomy. First, pluralism pro-
vides a measuring stick with which to evaluate one’s own culture; second,
it supplies cultural goods; and third, it presents viable exit options for the
members of society.
The notion of pluralism as an evaluative measuring stick is a rather
straightforward one. The mere existence of and interaction with other cul-
tural groups within a society provides a point of reference for members of
other groups to use in appraising the value and legitimacy of their own cul-
ture. A multitude of value sets, concepts of the good, and norms will
prompt the thoughtful individual to compare his or her own culture with
others present. This evaluative process will result in either a reaffirmation of
one’s native culture, its rejection, or, most likely, a compromise position
where one both reaffirms aspects while at the same time discarding as inap-
plicable those practices or beliefs found to be distasteful. No matter what the
outcome of this process is in terms of rejection or reaffirmation, merely
engaging in it results in a situation of increased individual autonomy,
since the subsequent condition is one of choice rather than circumstance.
This idea of pluralism as a prompt to cultural evaluation is akin to
the dialectal process articulated by John Stuart Mill’s concept of the mar-
ketplace of ideas. Various cultural ideas and values are set forth, which are
then discussed, defended and debated. The assumption here is that only
those ideas that are considered worthwhile by a large number of people will
6 Musschenga 202.
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 19
survive this process; all others will lose supporters and become obsolete.
Mill thought that human beings progressed in virtue of this dialectal clash
of ideas. This process can similarly assist individual autonomy in a very
meaningful way.
The second way that pluralism assists autonomy is by providing a
variety of cultural goods such as food, music and dress. This point is very
much related to the previous one, in that the fundamental idea is that plu-
ralism creates choice. The difference is that the cultural goods which plu-
ralism provides can be enjoyed—for the most part—without fear of
contradiction. The enjoyment of Chinese food, for example, or the beauty
of a traditional Native American dance, can be realized by individuals
within virtually any culture. The goods of other cultures enrich the daily
lives of individuals by presenting them with meaningful choices concerning
food they eat, music they listen to, and clothing that they wear. Autonomy
here is bolstered by choice; whatever life individuals select for themselves
will become more a result of autonomy as the number of options
increases. The mere enjoyment of the entertainment offerings of other cul-
tures may seem like a relatively shallow benefit of cultural pluralism.
However, how one chooses to live his or her daily existence is not a shal-
low concern. The existence of a variety of different entertainment offer-
ings—as a source of social commentary, for example—is an important way in
which autonomy is facilitated.
The third way that cultural pluralism assists autonomy is by providing
viable exit options for members of the society. If, upon evaluation of their
native culture, individuals find it to be either too unresponsive to reform
or simply so abhorrent that they cannot imagine staying within it, the exis-
tence of other cultures provides them with other means to procure the
benefits of cultural groups, assuming that the other cultures are relatively
open to the receipt of new members. Additionally, the presence of competing
cultures may make cultural elites more responsive to the wishes of the
group’s members out of a fear of defections, which again has a positive
20 JUSTINCOX
effect on autonomy. The existence of viable exit options obviously
strengthens autonomy by making one’s membership in a cultural group more
a matter of choice.
Though the benefits of cultural pluralism are no doubt best realized
through interpersonal contact of members of different groups, some of the
same effects can be felt through other means. Increasingly robust and per-
vasive methods of communication and mass media, for example, mean that
news, images, and ideas of far-away cultures can be experienced by people
around the world. Granted, the effects will be diminished, the media por-
trayals will likely be biased and inaccurate, and such technology has not
reached all corners of the globe, but it remains a viable secondary method
for the actualization of pluralism with a great amount of potential for future
growth.
The fact that some amount of pluralism seems to greatly facilitate the
realization of the benefits of culture—specifically, individual autonomy—
means that pluralism itself takes on intrinsic value. As Raz puts it, “If hav-
ing an autonomous life is an ultimate value, then having a sufficient range
of acceptable options is an intrinsic value.”7Ronald Dworkin, for his part,
thinks the intrinsic value we grant to pluralism is showcased in the fact that
“we even try to preserve cultures we do not especially admire, because they
embody processes of human creation we consider important and
admirable.”8The problem that is presented, then, is that in situations of lit-
tle diversity it seems as if we should want to grant increasing amounts of
value to the cultures that do exist if only for the fact that they are rare. The
critical mass necessary for pluralism is quite ambiguous, but it seems as if
there may indeed be times when we would want to give minority cultures
special protections.
At no time, of course, should we coerce or compel individuals to
adopt or maintain a specific way of life merely for the sake of pluralism.
Additionally, even in situations of little pluralism, the desire for diversity
7 Quoted in Tamir 30.
8 Dworkin 75.
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 21
for its own sake should not give minority cultures absolute multicultural
rights. The rationale for both not coercing individuals into a culture and
not giving minority cultures a carte blanche is the same: both situations
seem to work against the end of culture—the fostering of individual auton-
omy. Instead, those who wish to practice a minority culture ought to be
given multicultural rights that accord with the dictates of public reason,
which I shall discuss in the next section.
III. Dictates of Public Reason
I propose that the procedures of public reason, as articulated by John
Rawls, ought to be employed to determine the proper limits of toleration
for multicultural rights. Though initially intended as a procedural mecha-
nism for deciding the fundamental political questions of justice, the
important concepts of public reason can be applied to the multicultural
rights debate as well. In particular, the reasoning used to justify claims for
multicultural rights ought to be public in ways consistent with Rawls’s pub-
lic reason. The important points are that the discussion must take place
between free and equal citizens who satisfy requirements of reciprocity; rea-
sons must take into account the public good; and the nature and content
of such reasoning is public.9The essential idea here is that claims for mul-
ticultural rights must be made with some concern for the public good and
willingness to act reciprocally using justifications that the rest of society
would consider reasonable.
The idea of voluntariness is again invoked by the requirement that
the discussion take place between free and equal citizens. Specifically in
regards to cultural groups, this component of public reason seems to
demand that individuals ought to be able to leave those groups without
incurring unreasonable costs, noting that exiting a group will probably
always involve at least some loss of rights. For example, if individuals decide
to denounce their membership in their Native American tribe, doing so
9 Rawls 133.
22 JUSTINCOX
will inevitably result in a forfeiture of the rights to use the resources of the
tribe or the right to participation in the decision-making process of the
group. In contrast, I would count as unreasonable costs things such as exit
fees, where one would have to pay to leave a group, or losses of liberty that
would deprive exiting individuals of rights that are guaranteed to them as
members of the larger society.
The amount of social cost to the exiting individual that should be
permissible is a much more difficult case. Social cost here means the psy-
chological, emotional, and spiritual losses incurred by the leaving of one’s
cultural group. In some instances, it seems as if those costs would be so
high to some individuals that they would be willing to endure situations quite
detrimental to their well-being because of the fact that they feel as if exit
simply is not a viable option for them. If and when such a situation occurs,
the lack of a truly viable exit option should lower our threshold of tolera-
tion because of the fact that the harmful situation is likely not a product of
consent nor does it foster autonomy. I will talk more about this idea in sec-
tion four when discussing the consequences of public reason on multi-
cultural rights.
Those exiting their native cultural groups cannot go into cultural
limbo, so to speak, but rather they require the ability to join other cultural
groups or, alternately, the right to establish competing groups, lest they be
denied the benefits of autonomy that culture affords. Given that many cul-
tural groups are either based on rather rigid characteristics that are consid-
ered constitutive of their members, such as familial ties or ethnicity, or have
high costs of entrance, in the case of some religious groups, culturally
unaffiliated individuals will no doubt sometimes find it difficult to gain
membership in the groups that they would like to join. Or it may be the
case that individuals dissatisfied with their native group are similarly
unhappy with what all the other groups have to offer. Both situations
seem to present problems for the notion of voluntariness, since the indi-
vidual dissatisfied with the cultural offerings of society seems destined to
remain unfulfilled.
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 23
I believe that a liberal society that respects all people as free and equal
citizens, as demanded by Rawls’s public reason, will take measures to pre-
vent this possibility by guaranteeing the right of individuals to establish
and maintain competing groups in order to satisfy their particular needs.
The exercise of this right is perhaps best illustrated by the fragmentation
of various religious groups within the United States. Those raised within
a Hasidic Jewish family, for example, now have various options for prac-
ticing their faith if they become dissatisfied with the ultra conservative lean-
ings of their native cultural group, Conservative and Reform synagogues
having all been established out of discontent with the existing religious
offerings.
A difficult case for the idea of voluntariness is that of children.
Lacking full rationale and the liberty of adults, one would be hard pressed
to say that the cultural membership of any individual child is a product of
voluntarily given consent. This fact has repercussions for the cultural prac-
tices that involve children, practices that we ought to tolerate within a lib-
eral society. Given the stated end of culture discussed earlier—individual
autonomy—I propose that the limits of toleration for cultural practices
involving children should also reflect this concern for autonomy. I believe
that those practices that limit either present or future autonomy in an irrev-
ocable manner ought not to be tolerated. Therefore, the denial of basic
education, for example, and any form of physical disfigurement, such as
female genital mutilation, would fall outside of the realm of what a liberal
society should tolerate because of the long-term restrictions of autonomy
that these practices engender.
The next requirement of Rawls’s public reason is that of reciprocity.
As applied to cultural groups and multicultural rights, the requirement of
reciprocity basically amounts to a willingness to allow the peaceful coexis-
tence of and to engage in discussion with other groups, including those
that have beliefs and values that are fundamentally at odds with one’s own.
24 JUSTINCOX
Those groups unwilling to act reciprocally would simply not be considered
reasonable, since their actions are not conducive to the perpetuation of the
liberal, democratic society that allows for the existence of diverse cultural
groups in the first place. At the least, this requirement helps “quiet divi-
siveness and encourage social stability.”10
Linked to the idea of reciprocity is the constraint that reasons given
to justify multicultural rights must take into account the public good.
Because of the ramifications such rights have on both pluralism and indi-
vidual autonomy, these two subjects should play a prominent role in any
discussion concerning the granting of multicultural rights. The demon-
stration that groups require additional protections to ensure that the
autonomous choices of their members are respected will create a prima
faciecase for the concession of those rights because of the public’s inter-
est in having a pluralist society and the development of autonomous citi-
zens. Other interests and considerations, such as third-party effects, will of
course also be factored into the final decision, but it is the common inter-
est in promoting autonomy that will be compelling enough to justify the
initial claim.
As Rawls explains, the requirements of public reason will push justi-
fications of multicultural rights toward more general principles that all
could accept as reasonable and away from group-specific reasons. Thus,
claims based on appeals to tradition or specific religious doctrines will
likely be excluded since others in society could not be expected to find
them reasonable; instead, groups will have to move to broader principles,
such as the importance of cultural and religious practices to individual
autonomy, that all reasonable people could support, no matter their par-
ticular cultural or religious background. If and when groups fail to justify
their claims with appeals to principles others support, such claims will not
be considered reasonable.
10Ibid. 150.
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 25
IV. The Application of Public Reason
Given that individual autonomy is the end achieved through the var-
ious benefits of culture, I believe that the application of Rawls’s public rea-
son to the question of toleration for cultural practices will result in a form
of multicultural rights that is largely contingent upon autonomy. Those cul-
tural practices that either foster autonomy or are manifestations of it ought
to be protected. Conversely, we ought to be skeptical of cultural practices
that either restrict autonomy or do not seem to be products of consent. I
envision a continuum concerning how much respect and protection ought
to be extended to various cultural practices. At the high-respect, high-pro-
tection end of the spectrum are (1) those cultural practices that are per-
formed by fully rational and consensual adults, and (2) those practices
that are essential to fostering individual autonomy. As one would expect, the
other end of the continuum is occupied by (1) illiberal practices that chil-
dren or similarly irrational human beings are forced to perform, and (2)
practices that severely restrict individual autonomy. Of course, there will
probably often be cases in which the two different types of effects of auton-
omy—manifestations and the fostering of—will be present, which would
result in an even stronger case for the protection or restriction of the prac-
tice, depending on the end of the continuum on which it falls.
Important factors in this model are how consensual the act is, its
effects on autonomy, and whether or not the actor is a fully rational per-
son. As discussed in the previous section, the availability and plausibility of
exit options will have a lot to do with whether or not we consider the prac-
tice of a particular culture to be truly consensual. The existence of a great
deal of pluralism would seemingly go a long way toward facilitating the
goal of having viable exit options, so long as the various groups are rela-
tively welcoming of new members. High costs of exiting or a lack of exit
options would lower the threshold of toleration because of the increased
power given to cultural elites to impose illiberal policies upon their groups
26 JUSTINCOX
because the less powerful members lack recourse. Similarly, practices that
restrict autonomy or are imposed on irrational members, like children,
should be afforded less toleration. Will Kymlicka, a prominent commen-
tator on the debate concerning multicultural rights, argues similarly that
we ought not to protect cultural practices that are oppressive because doing
so would threaten “the very reason we had for being concerned with cul-
tural membership—that it allows for meaningful individual choice.”11
V. Objections
Some, such as Susan Moller Okin, are skeptical of granting multi-
cultural rights to any groups that practice illiberal policies, no matter how
consensual the situation may seem. Okin is specifically concerned with the
effects of such group rights on women, since claims concerning “culture”
have been often used to justify their subordination and oppression by men.
She argues that there are great epistemological problems with determining
when an action or a membership in a culture is truly consensual, since,
according to her, “the subordination of women is often informal and pri-
vate,” which makes the gender inequities and the consequent effects on
autonomy “less easily discernible.”12In summary, because of the historical
realities of gender inequalities that could seemingly be perpetuated by the
granting of multicultural group rights, and the inherent difficulties in
ascertaining individual consent, liberal critics argue that we should extend
such rights only quite begrudgingly, with the assurances that groups act
liberally both in the private and public spheres.
The difficulty with this view is that it seems to run the risk of unduly
limiting individual autonomy rather than fostering it. Okin’s argument
concerning the difficulties in determining consent is a good one; however,
the solution is not to simply deny individuals the right to choose to partic-
ipate in cultural practices deemed “illiberal.” In fact, such a stance would
11 Kymlicka 171–172.
12Okin 22–23.
MULTICULTURALRIGHTS 27
be illiberal in and of itself. John Stuart Mill argues that acts performed
amongst consenting, rational adults ought not to be restricted, unless they
cause harm to third parties. Note here that Mill was speaking just of rational
adults; children, in his view, require protection because they lack proper rea-
soning ability. This liberal idea is reflected in my own conception of mul-
ticultural rights; because children are not at liberty to rationally choose
their own living arrangements and cultural practices, they warrant more
protection from potentially harmful influences.
However, to not allow fully rational adults the right to choose their
own lifestyles, even when we think it to be detrimental, would be an unjus-
tified limitation of individual liberty. As Mill puts it, “All errors which he
is likely to commit against advice and warning, are far outweighed by the
evil of allowing others to constrain him to what they deem his good.”13
Restricting individuals’ rights to partake in activities and persist in situa-
tions that we feel are harmful because they violate our liberal sensibilities
would breach the very same liberal doctrine in a much more fundamental
fashion because we would be denying the right to choose one’s own con-
ception of the good, a blatant infringement of individual autonomy. I
believe that my view of multicultural rights, which does allow for the con-
tinuation of consensual but illiberal practices, does a better job of respecting
individual autonomy.
Bonnie Honig, in her essay “My Culture Made Me Do It,” explores
many of the cultural practices objected to by critics such as Susan Okin.
Honig’s discussion of the treatment of female sexuality—in the form of cre-
ation myths, sexual restrictions, veiling, polygamy, etc.—highlights the fact
that it remains difficult to determine which and to what extent practices
harm or empower women. “Culture,” according to Honig, “is a way of life,
a rich and timeworn grammar of human activity, . . . a living, breathing sys-
tem for the distribution and enactment of agency, power, and privileges dis-
tributed among its members and beyond.”14 On this view, attempts to
13Mill 140–141.
14 Okin 39.
28 JUSTINCOX
categorize any particular situation or practice as categorically harmful or ben-
eficial to its participants will likely run into a quagmire of relevant and
complicating cultural factors.
The solution to this problem is to largely leave it to the individual to
decide what is best for him- or herself. The concession of multicultural
rights to groups comprised of fully consenting, rational adults is the facil-
itation of the very liberal idea of fostering individual autonomy by giving
each individual the opportunity to choose his or her own conception of the
good without undue state interference, even if the group decides to maintain
illiberal internal policies. I think that making multicultural rights contingent
on groups being liberal would be to act paternalistically; further, it would
be a restriction of individual autonomy, which would frustrate the very end
of cultural membership.
References
Dworkin, Ronald. Life’s Dominion. London: HarperCollins, 1993.
Friedman, Marilyn. Autonomy, Gender, Politics. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2003.
Kymlicka, Will. Liberalism, Community and Culture. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1989.
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. Ed. David Bromwich & George Kateb. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2003.
Musschenga, Albert W. “Intrinsic Value as a Reason for the Preservation of
Minority Cultures.” Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 1 (1998):
201–225.
Okin, Susan Moller. Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women? Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1999.
Rawls, John. The Law of Peoples with “The Idea of Public Reason Revisited.”
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Tamir, Yael. Liberal Nationalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1993.