Opposites in Plato and Aristotle
Carl J. Cranney, Brigham Young University
This essay won first place in the 2005 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition.
I. Introduction
Even the most cursory overview of pre-Socratic philosophy will show that many of the pre-
Socratics dealt with opposites in their theories. Aristotle recognized this about his predecessors,1
though his statement may be a generalization.2 The idea of opposites figures prominently into the
thought of Hippocrates, Parmenides, the Pythagoreans, Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Anaxagoras,
among others.3 There is even precedent for rhetorical use of opposites as far back as Homer.4
Though many of these thinkers differed in their approaches to particular opposites, there was
rarely doubt “that some correlation was to be set up between these [hot and cold, wet and dry]
and other pairs of opposites.”5 By the time of Plato and Aristotle there was a large and long-
standing precedent for using opposites in both rhetoric and philosophical thought.
We are intuitively aware of opposites—Simmias is taller than Socrates, which means that
Socrates is shorter than Simmias. Warnock helps define the concept of opposites by stating that
opposites are part of a same range. Opposite is, in a spatial metaphor that Aristotle uses, the
furthest away you can get from something without leaving the same road.6 They “must be of the
same kind, though of that kind, as different as possible.”7
Any theory of opposites will have to sufficiently address at least the following questions: first,
how do we come to know the ideas themselves, the terms that we call opposites? Second, how do
we apply those ideas to make distinctions like “Socrates is smaller than Simmias?” Third, how
can an object or person progress from one opposite to the other, like Socrates being small but
growing to become a large man? Fourth, how self-consistent is the theory? The more of these
questions a theory of opposites can answer, and the better it can do so, the more cogent it is. The
purpose of this paper is to look at what Plato and Aristotle did with the concepts of opposites8
that they inherited from the pre-Socratics and which of the two philosophers has a more cogent
theory of opposites, if such a distinction can be made.
II. Opposites in Plato’s Forms
Before Plato the concept of opposites was treated very generally and haphazardly, the pre-
Socratics not making distinctions between different classes of opposites and assuming that
opposites could only be predicated one at a time by a single object. Plato’s major contribution to
the discussion of opposites was his elucidation of when it is possible to predicate a pair of
opposites of the same subject at the same time, but he did not go much beyond this new idea.9 To
further this discussion, other aspects of Plato’s thought must be fleshed out, which will require
drawing from various discussions in his dialogues to find pertinent information.
Plato’s ontology is that particular things are the least real and eternal forms the most real. We
don’t come to know and understand these opposites in life—our understanding of them is
recollection of encounters with the eternal forms before birth.10 They never change, which is why
we can speak of the Tall, the Short, and others—they always have been, and always will be.
In the Phaedo Socrates discusses the theory of forms and various properties of the forms
themselves.11 He talks about the Tall and the Short, comparing himself as the shortest, Simmias a
little taller, followed by Phaedo, who is the tallest of the three.12 Apparently this means that
Simmias has both tallness (in relation to Socrates) and shortness (in relation to Phaedo). Earlier
in the dialogue Socrates introduces an argument that everything comes from its opposite.13 So
what is the nature of opposites in the forms? Is there an opposite for every one of the forms?
Because Plato’s theory is that these opposite forms actually exist, there are only three approaches
to these opposites that can be used—closely mirroring the three options presented by the Eleatic
Stranger in the Sophist.14 First, that there are opposites for every form; second, that no forms
have opposites; and third, that some of the forms have opposites, and others do not. Plato does
not decisively pick one of these three approaches, so they must be examined each in turn.
Support for the idea that there are opposites for every form can be found in several of Plato’s
other dialogues. In the Protagoras is a discussion of opposites such as beauty and ugliness, good
and bad, shrill and deep noises, and others.15 Socrates asks, “so whatever is done in a certain way
is done through the agency of a certain quality, and whatever is done in the opposite way is done
through the agency of its opposite?”16
In the Phaedo one of the arguments that Socrates gives for the immortality of the soul is as
follows: if everything has a quality, it came to be from the opposite of that quality. If someone is
tall then they must have been short, and if someone is alive, they must have been dead before,
and will return to being dead in the future. According to this, all states arise from their
opposites,17 thus there must be opposites.
There are two major problems with this approach. The first is the example of the three men’s
height. Simmias is said to be both tall (participates in the Tall) and short (participates in the
Small). But how does this help us make distinctions? What is the purpose of saying that Simmias
is tall if Simmias is also short? “How can each member of any pair of opposites be distinguished
from the other?”18 If every form has an opposite, then anything that partakes in that form will
also partake in the opposite of that form. Plato stumbled on a reply in the Republic, namely “that
the same thing will not be willing to do or undergo opposites in the same part of itself, in relation
to the same thing, at the same time.”19 But, Nehamas asks, “why then did Plato introduce the
forms?”20 Why are they necessary if all that needs to be done is compare the height of Simmias
to Socrates and Phaedo?
The second problem arises because Plato is reluctant to say that there are forms of things with
negative connotations. If every form has an opposite, there must be forms of things like evil,
disease, suffering, ugliness, and so on. This objection is not new; Plato himself raises it the
Parmenides, where the young Socrates is asked about “things that might seem absurd, like hair
and mud and dirt, or anything else undignified and worthless.”21 Plato seems reluctant to
condone ideal forms of negative things, as the young Socrates himself says a few lines later,
noting that the theory of forms is not fully thought-out yet. Plato never responded to the
objection he has Parmenides pose further than what the young Socrates says in the next few
lines.
To explain how Plato can deny the existence of some forms requires looking at the second
approach to opposites in the theory of forms—that there are no opposites. This approach has no
direct textual evidence but results from Plato’s reluctance to say that there is a form of Evil, or
that the Ugly exists. It will be illuminating here to return to the earlier mentioned example of the
respective heights of Socrates, Simmias, and Phaedo. In order to deny the existence of, say, the
Short, one must say that each of these three partakes of the Tall. This means that Simmias does
not participate in both the Short and the Tall. He participates less in the Tall than Phaedo does,
but more than Socrates does.
There are a few potential problems with this approach. Perhaps it isn’t that Phaedo participates
the most in the Tall, and the other two less so; perhaps it is that Socrates participates the most in
the Short, and the other two less so. Of the two forms, which is a better choice, the Tall or the
Short? Can there be any reasonable explanation for choosing one over the other? Any who
advocate this position of no opposites in the theory of forms must pick one opposite form over
the other—but in this and many other instances there is no good warrant on which to base a
decision.
The next objection arises from the recollection argument in the Phaedo.22 According to that
argument, in this life we never encounter “the Beautiful itself, the Good itself, the Just, the
Pious,” and others.23 Since we have never learned of them here, we must have existed before we
were born and learned of them ideas sometime before our birth. The objection is: if there are not
forms of things like the Ugly, the Bad, the Unjust, the Impious, and so on, then where do we get
our ideas of them? We do not simply have an idea of the Good, and say that Hitler participates
less in the Good than Gandhi. We call Hitler “evil,” not simply “not-good,” and have genuine
conception of evil. With Plato’s account, where does our concept of the Evil come from, if not
the same place our concept of the Good came from? The issue is further complicated when it’s
discovered that Plato sometimes even had terms for the intermediates between two opposites,24
sometimes leading us to not just two but three terms for describing the level of a particular
attribute.25
The last objection is that in various places Plato himself mentions opposites, as we have
discussed before. A good example, one that will move us into a discussion of the third approach
to opposites, comes from the Protagoras where Socrates and Protagoras discuss various
opposites such as beauty, ugliness, goodness, badness, shrill noises and deep tones.26 It can be
assumed that Plato believes there are at least some opposites in the forms, and so the second
approach, that there are none, is refuted.
The third approach concerning opposites is to propose that some forms have opposites, and
others do not. If we wish to avoid forms like the Evil, as well as others with negative
connotations, then we can easily do this by relegating them to the category of forms that do not
have opposites. After all, “there is no reason to believe a priori that every argument Plato uses
generates a Form for every general term.”27
There are also other places where Plato discusses what may be termed “neutral forms.” They
have no opposites, and no moral connotations. An example would be the discussion at the
beginning of The Republic book X concerning the form of a bed.28 There obviously isn’t an
opposite of “bedness.” This would then be relegated to the second category—that of not having
an opposite.29
But where would the line be drawn? Which forms would have opposites? The most intuitive idea
would be to draw it at the distinction between metaphysical and physical. The dividing line
might be set between forms related to physical attributes (e.g. the Tall, the Fast, etc.) that have
opposites (e.g. the Short, the Slow, etc.) and those forms with metaphysical attributes (e.g. the
Just, the Virtuous, the Pious, etc.) that do not have opposites. This would make a person unjust
because they lack participation in the Just. That same person could be short because they
participate in the Short, not because they participate less in the Tall.
This sounds like a good idea. Though the dividing line can be drawn at places other than the
quick example in the above paragraph, eternal forms of the things with negative connotations
need not exist, and other useful opposites can be kept.
Unfortunately a few of the same objections used to counter the first two approaches can also
apply here. First, Plato discusses forms of these things with negative connotations and the
argument from recollection reminds us that somewhere we must have encountered the Ugly in
order for us to have a concept of it. Second, the argument from opposites says that in order to
have one thing it must be generated from its opposite.
The third and strongest objection is one that is limited only to this third approach. Where is a
satisfactory place to draw the line? One possible place was outlined above, at the
physical/metaphysical line, to distinguish between forms with opposites and those without, but
by no means was this distinction adequate. In some ways this distinction itself is problematic. Is
bedness a characteristic in the physical world? That would seem to be the case—something
doesn’t participate in bedness unless it has physical characteristics. But the only conceivable
opposite of bedness is non-bedness, which is useless to describe the attributes of an object.30
Another example is the Beautiful and the Ugly. Using the term in the sense of physical beauty
(since we can call a piece of poetry beautiful but not ugly) means that any beautiful thing must
physically exist. This is problematic if the distinction is drawn at the physical/metaphysical line,
since the Ugly is one of those negative forms; yet beauty is a physical property. Obviously this
quick distinction is not complete. But can there be a completely satisfactory distinction made
between which forms have opposites and which do not?
With this reconstruction of all the possibilities of Plato’s theory, how does his theory answer the
questions posed in the introduction? The answer to the first question, how do we come to know
the opposite ideas, comes from the theory of recollection presented in the Phaedo. At some time
in the past our souls dwelt with the forms, so we have knowledge of them. The objection to this
answer is that we cannot know for sure if we ever were in such a place. The more intuitive
answer is that we merely look at two rocks, for example, and notice that one is bigger than the
other. This postulation of a realm of forms is philosophically burdensome as it unnecessarily
complicates the issue.
In response to the second question, distinctions like “Socrates is smaller than Simmias” can be
made. However, it seems they are made using empirical evidence, as Socrates does in the
Phaedo. We do not have to use the forms themselves as a means of measuring and comparing.31
They are unnecessary to answer this question.
The third question, how a person progresses from one opposite to another, like growing taller,
cannot be answered. We say that a tall person participates more in the Tall, but Plato gives no
explanation as to how, for example, a baby progresses from participating in the Short (or not
participating very much in the Tall) to becoming an adult who participates in the Tall.
And what of self-consistency? It is the case that Plato’s theory is not fully thought out
concerning how opposites function in the Forms. It has been fleshed out above and no matter
which approach is used the theory is not self-consistent. It further seems that it will never be
shown to be self-consistent concerning this particular aspect.
From this brief overview Plato’s theory cannot adequately perform the functions that a cogent
theory of opposites should. His theory of forms is plagued by its own metaphysical assumptions
and problems, and it cannot adequately answer any of the four criteria posed in the introduction.
III. Aristotle’s Discussion of Contraries
Aristotle’s discussion of opposites32 is more complex and delineated than Plato’s.33 He was the
first thinker to create a systematic analysis of opposites,34 and outlines the four different classes
of opposites in chapters 10 and 11 of the Categories. Those four classes are: correlatives,
contraries, privatives to positives, and affirmatives to negatives.35
Correlatives are opposites explained by reference to the other. For example, something known is
the opposite of knowledge. Double and half are the opposites that Aristotle introduces as
examples. There must be a double of something. The term “double” and whatever that something
is—sophists, apple pie, football tickets—is its opposite. They are interdependent since one
cannot exist without the other. There cannot be a double of nothing. This is very much parallel to
part of his earlier discussion of relatives.36
Contraries are more what Plato’s forms are concerned with—general terms. For example, “the
good is not spoken of as the good of the bad, but as the contrary of the bad.”37 These are
opposites of a different kind than correlatives, since the overabundance of one will result in the
annihilation of the other. This means they are not interdependent.
Privatives and positives both refer to the same subject. For example, “blind” and “seeing” are
both predicated of an eye. The natural state of this subject is to have the positive, in this case
sight. In order to be true opposites, these must both be predicated of a single object, much like
contraries. If Socrates is blind, and Phaedo can see, then “blind” and “seeing” are not, in this
instance, true opposites. Socrates is either blind or not—this is a statement that shows how
privatives and positives are opposites. Privatives and positives are also not interdependent.
Affirmatives and negatives deal with individual statements. “Health” and “sickness” cannot be
true statements since they are not statements. However, a sentence like “Socrates is sick” is a
statement. As such, it can be either true or false. Affirmatives and negatives are two statements
about the world that are mutually contradictory. In more modern terms this is the law of
excluded middle. Either Socrates is sick, or he is not. Affirmatives and negatives are also not
interdependent.
Of these four classes of opposites, only privates and positives as well as contraries are relevant to
this paper. They deal with the same types of differences that Plato’s forms do. Correlatives as
well as affirmatives and negatives, though opposites in the sense that Aristotle uses them, are not
opposites of the kind this paper is concerned with.
Both privatives and positives and contraries can be further explained by using Aristotle’s
ontology. In Plato’s ontology the most real things are the eternal forms, but Aristotle’s ontology
states that the most real things are the particulars.38 In On Generation and Corruption he
discusses how things change because of changes in properties of the underlying substratum.39
Bronze might be made into a coin, a rod, a sword, or a statue—but it is always bronze. If it is
mixed with different alloys, you have not changed the properties; you have changed the actual
substratum itself. Aristotle calls this change of substratum coming to be and passing away.40
This closely mirrors his discussion in the Categories, though the vocabulary is different. Instead
of “substratum” he uses “substance,” and instead of “property” he uses “accident.” Even with
different terms the point is much the same—substance cannot admit variation of degree,41 but the
accidents of that substance can change. It is “a distinctive mark of substance [. . .] that, while
remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary qualities.”42
An objection can be raised here that Aristotle uses the example of “blind” and “seeing,”43 which
are of course opposites. But what about those that have bad vision? The privative and positive of
“blind” and “seeing” has intermediates, but Aristotle does not discuss this. However, the
objection is easily enough dealt with. First, as was noted above44 that there might just be
semantic evolution at work regarding how the spectrum of a particular attribute is described. If
were is the case that the language developed so that there is no specific term for a person who
sees badly, it is certainly not Aristotle’s fault. Surely Aristotle understood that some people can
see better than others. A stronger reply is that Aristotle is correct—though sight and blindness
admit of intermediates, using the law of excluded middle we can say that either one can see or
one cannot see. And that does not create intermediates.
In the Physics Aristotle freely admits that most of his predecessors used opposites as the
principles of movement.45 It would seem that he himself has followed suit and adopted at least
this idea into his own theories. It is not a defining characteristic to be short for anybody; Socrates
might someday be tall. This means that being short, or tall, is an accident. It is a property of
Socrates, not a necessary condition for being Socrates. Socrates is moving away from being short
and moving towards being tall. It is merely a way of describing change or movement.
Aristotle discusses how this change or movement occurs in the Metaphysics. He discusses two
states of every object regarding the accidents of that object—actuality and potentiality.46 For
example, an acorn is potentially an oak tree, but an oak tree has become actualized. It is no
longer potentially an oak tree.
Potencies, or potentialities, “are either innate, like the senses, or come by practice.”47 Health is
something that is innate for most humans, but being a musician is something that can be learned.
In each potentiality, whether innate or acquired, lies the capability for something to be moved or
altered. The earth cannot move or be altered to become a man,48 but a builder may build a house,
taking the material’s potentiality and actualizing them into a dwelling.49 Someone or something
must act upon the object or person with potentiality in order to change the potentiality into
actuality, but if all of the necessary elements are there something has potentiality to be changed
into some actuality.50 For example, a tall pole can potentially be shorter—if it is acted upon and
chopped down. A shorter tree can become a larger tree because it has the potential to grow.
One possible objection to Aristotle’s discussion of innate potentialities is that there is really no
satisfactory reason to say that an acorn must potentially be an oak tree. Why not some other kind
of plant? Where does this potentiality come from, and why does this innate potentiality exist the
way it does? Aristotle never addresses this possible objection. Potentiality is known by what a
thing can become. We do not know why one thing changes into another specific thing.
With this more complex discussion of opposite, how does Aristotle’s theories answer the three
questions posed in the introduction? The first two questions are answered together. We come to
know opposites by making comparisons, Simmias is shorter than Socrates, and so forth. When
we say “a tall tree” we are really saying “a tree larger than another tree”51 or perhaps larger than
average. We must make distinctions in order to even generate the terms like “tall” and “short” in
the first place. How does one change from one opposite to the other? First of all, the answer is
not plagued by the difficulties outlined above for Plato’s theories. We don’t have to arbitrarily
choose which form to have, or determine when a person crosses from more participation in one
form, like the Short, to another, like the Tall. Second, given Aristotle’s discussion of potentiality
and actuality his theories can more readily account for how an object or a person can change—an
infant is potentially a tall man. However, Aristotle never describes how innate potentialities
work—how it is necessarily the case that an acorn can only become an oak tree.
IV. Conclusions
Plato brings up opposites in the theory of forms, but his writings do not conclusively support any
one of the three possible approaches to those opposites. This is not necessarily surprising since
Plato never fully maps his theory of forms in the first place, and it must be pieced together.52
Furthermore, he cannot adequately answer the first three of the questions posed in the
introduction. As far as self-consistency, he is plagued by his own metaphysical assumptions that,
under closer examination, cannot hold up.
Aristotle does not make the same metaphysical assumptions. His ontology is quite opposed to
Plato’s in that he believes the particular things to be more real whereas Plato believes the
universals to be more real. This allows Aristotle to answer Nehamas, in that “in order to derive
the (partially) contradictory aspect of sensible particulars, something must remain constant for
the contrary properties to apply to.”53
The difference in ontology allows Aristotle to answer the questions that were posed in the
introduction in ways that Plato cannot. Aristotle can say that distinctions are made merely by
comparing two things to each other, not by their participation (or lack thereof) in a metaphysical
form. And since it is not the case that something moves from participation in a form to lack of
participation or participation in the opposite form, it is also much easier to understand how an
object can move from one opposite to the other, like getting taller or more hot. After all, it is the
case that one of the primary characteristics of substances is that they can have contraries in
them.54 Changes come about because of the interplay between potentiality and actuality as
objects and people move from being potential to being actual. We come to know these concepts
of opposites to explain some of these changes, like short to tall and hot to cold, not because there
are metaphysical forms for objects in the world to participate in. In sum, Aristotle’s theories deal
more adequately with opposites than does Plato’s because they are not forced to deal with the
problems associated with Plato’s metaphysical assumptions, they answer the three basic
questions that any theory of opposites must deal with more readily than Plato’s theories, and they
are more internally self-consistent. Though Aristotle’s theories are not flawless, in this limited
topic they are more cogent than Plato’s.
1 Aristotle, Physics, 188b 27. All works by Aristotle are cited in Bekker notation, and all direct quotes come from
The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon (New York: Random House, 1941).
2 G. E. R. Lloyd, Polarity and Analogy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966) 15.
3 Ibid., “The Hot and the Cold, the Dry and the Wet in Greek Philosophy,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 84 (1964):
92-93. See also Lloyd, Polarity, 16-17.
4 Lloyd, Polarity, 90-91.
5 Lloyd, “Hot and Cold,” 105-6.
6 Mary Warnock, “A Note on Aristotle: Categories 6a 15,” Mind, New Series, 59 (1950): 552.
7 Ibid., 554.
8 Specifically opposites between terms, not opposites between statements. Lloyd, Polarity 161-62.
9 Lloyd, Polarity 169-70.
10 Plato, Phaedo 74b-77a. All works by Plato are cited in Stephanus notation, and all direct quotes come from Plato:
Complete Works, ed. John M. Cooper (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1997).
11 Ibid., 102-03.
12 Ibid., 102b-c.
13 Ibid., 71.
14 Plato, Sophist, 252e.
15 Plato, Protagoras, 332.
16 Ibid., 332c.
17 Plato, Phaedo, 70e-72e.
18 Alexander Nehamas, “Predication and Forms of Opposites in Phaedo,” Review of Metaphysics 26 (1973): 466.
19 Plato, Republic, 436b.
20 Nehamas, "Predication and Forms," 480.
21 Plato, Parmenides, 130c.
22 Plato, Phaedo, 74b-77a.
23 Ibid., 75d.
24 Lloyd, Polarity, 147. Plato, Symposium, 202a.
25 So for some concepts we have one term, like “justice.” We use this one term to describe the entire spectrum, the
other end being simply “unjust.” For other concepts we have two terms to describe the opposite ends of a spectrum,
such as “beautiful” and “ugly.” For yet other concepts there are three terms, like “ignorance,” “correct opinion,” and
“wisdom,” which describe both the ends and the middle of the spectrum. Is this merely semantic evolution, or would
Plato say there is something else at work here?
26 Plato, Protagoras 332c.
27 Nehamas, "Predication and Forms," 463.
28 Plato, Republic, 597-8.
29 The only way an opposite form could be generated would be by using the law of excluded middle, namely there’s
a form of “bedness” and one of “non-bedness.” However, this is such a basic rule of logic that it makes the move
nearly worthless in trying to describe the attributes of an object. Besides, describing something as partaking in non-
bedness would lead to lots of useless descriptions. To describe a car would be to mention that it partakes of non-
bedness, non-tableness, non-horseness, etc. Plato’s purpose was not to use the forms to describe things via negativa.
30 See note 29.
31 That we must make the distinctions using empirical evidence is supported by the statements in the Phaedo that we
cannot encounter the forms in this life (75a-c).
32 In the edition cited the word is translated “contraries” on occasion, but since Aristotle has a more specific use of
that term I will continue to use “opposites” in the body of the paper.
33 Lloyd, Polarity 161.
34 Ibid., 170.
35 Aristotle, Categories, 11b 15-20. Aristotle also mentions the four classes of opposites elsewhere, but his
discussion in the Categories is the most relevant. Lloyd, Polarity 161.
36 Aristotle, Categories, 6a 35-6b 35.
37 Ibid., 11b 35.
38 Ibid., 3b 15.
39 Aristotle, On Generation and Corruption 319b 12.
40 Ibid., 319b 17.
41 Aristotle, Categories 3b 33.
42 Ibid., 4a 10-11.
43 Ibid., 12a 26.
44 See note 25.
45 Aristotle, Physics, 188a 18-27.
46 Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1045b 34 and 1046b 30.
47 Ibid., 1047b 31.
48 Ibid., 1049a 1.
49 Ibid., 1049a 10.
50 An exception are those contraries that cannot be predicated of certain things. A fire will never be cold, for
example. Neither would we ever call a stone blind. Aristotle, Categories 12b 38, 12a 33.
51 Christos Evangeliou, Aristotle’s Categories and Porphyry (Leiden, Netherlands: E.J. Brill, 1988) 160.
52 Nehamas, "Predication and Forms," 461.
53 Ibid., 469.
54 Aristotle, Categories, 4b 14.