Aporiavol. 16 no. 2—2006
By Gödel I Do Not Mean Schmidt
JASONDAYLEY
I
n Naming and Necessity, Saul Kripke attacks the descriptivist theory of
proper names made popular by Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, and
P.F. Strawson. Kripke proposes several examples that point out weak-
nesses in the descriptivist theory as well as a more accurate picture of how
names achieve reference to objects. Among Kripke's examples is a counter-
factual situation in which Kurt Gödel does not produce the incomplete-
ness theorem but fools the world into thinking that he has. There is some
question in the descriptivist theory whether a person who only knows
Gödel as the author of the incompleteness proof refers, using the name
"Gödel," to the person Kurt Gödel or to the actual author of the incom-
pleteness theorem. John Searle, in "Proper Names and Intentionality,"
responds on behalf of the descriptivists both to Kripke's better picture of
naming and specifically to the Gödel example. While Searle believes that
Kripke has mischaracterized the descriptivists and adopted their method
into his own, Searle himself has misrepresented Kripke's argument and
given a descriptivist answer that only strengthens Kripke's point against
such theories. Consequently, Searle's reply to Kripke's Gödel example mis-
understands the implications of this example for the descriptivist theory,
and Searle fails to give an adequate reply.
Advocates of a descriptivist theory of proper names believe that
names achieve reference by use of a definite description. There is some
variety of opinions among these advocates as to how this occurs. Frege
wrote that every name has an associated definite description that is the
Jason Dayley is a senior majoring in philosophy with a minor in logic at Brigham
Young University. After graduation in December 2006, he will attend law school.
2 JASONDAYLEY
manner or sense in which it refers to the intended object (Frege, "On Sense
and Nominatum" 200). Russell wrote that names are merely placeholders
or abbreviations of definite descriptions and that the denoting phrase,
rather than the object itself, is the constituent of a sentence (Russell, "On
Denoting" 492–493). Russell did allow that if an object is known by a
direct acquaintance, its name may simply present the object named, but
problems with this theory pushed him to later reduce the set of names that
work in this way to ostensively defined sense data like "red here." So what
we commonly call a name, at least for Russell's latter theory, is merely a dis-
guised definite description.
The example of the name "Plato" may help to clarify the way names
work according to these theories. "Plato" refers to an object because it con-
tains or is the abbreviation of a definite description. "The man who was a
student of Socrates and taught Aristotle," is such a definite description that
seems to pick out the object we would normally want to refer to by the
name "Plato." This definite description is the sense in which the name is
used. A name may have more than one sense, but only one sense can be
meant in any one use of the name. A descriptive sentence containing the
name "Plato" asserts that what is referred to by the intended sense of this
name has the properties indicated by the predicate of that sentence, or if
the subject is predicated as the referent of a definite description, then the
sentence asserts that the predicate description picks out the same object as
the definite description which is the sense of the name used as the subject.
Take the sentence "Plato is my favorite philosopher." According to Frege's
theory, this sentence seems to show that the sense of "Plato," "the man who
was a student of Socrates and taught Aristotle," picks out the same object
as the predicate description, "my favorite philosopher." Russell's theory
makes this work more directly. The sentence, according to Russell, should
be understood as "the object which was a man, learned from Socrates, and
taught Aristotle, is the same object as my favorite philosopher." So, gener-
ally, Frege and Russell assert that a name serves only to pick out an object
by means of an inherent definite description.
Strawson criticized Russell's understanding of how definite descrip-
tions work, though he maintained a descriptivist theory of proper names.
Strawson clarified that a description itself does not refer, but the use of a
BYGÖDELI DONOTMEANSCHMIDT 3
description by a person does (Strawson, “On Referring” 326–327). While
Strawson says little about names specifically, his criticism of Russell seems
to be relevant to the descriptivist theory. Since Strawson was a descriptivist,
it follows from his use distinction of descriptions that names also do not
refer. Only the use of a name by a person refers. The important point here
is that for Strawson the definite description by which a name achieves ref-
erence is not part of the name, but is part of the intention of the speaker.
If my seven-year-old son were named Plato, it is not likely that my com-
mand "Plato! Come and pick up your toys" would be directed to the stu-
dent of Socrates who in turn taught Aristotle. This idea, that the definite
description associated with a name is a reflection of the speaker's intention,
will be returned to in discussing Searle's response to Kripke.
Kripke attacks the descriptivists with a number of counterexamples;
one of which serves as the focus of this paper (Kripke, Naming and
Necessity).1Kurt Gödel is most often known for producing the incomplete-
ness of arithmetic theorem. Following the descriptivist theory, when a per-
son uses the name "Gödel" he is able to pick out a certain person by an
implied use of the definite description "author of the incompleteness
proof." When I write the sentence, "Gödel was a mathematician," I mean
that the author of the incompleteness proof was a mathematician. It may
seem obvious that the author of the incompleteness theorem was a mathe-
matician, but if this is what is commonly known about Gödel then my
original statement is just as obvious. In any case, the descriptivist theory's
treatment of this situation seems to reflect my intention in using the sen-
tence.
To show the problem with this picture, Kripke describes a hypothet-
ical situation in which the definite description used picks out someone
other than the person intended. Say, for example, that Gödel was a bril-
liant man who did everything a biography says he did, except that he did
not create the incompleteness proof. Suppose instead that his brilliant
though obscure friend Mr. Schmidt actually came up with the entire proof,
1 Kripke’s book will hereafter be cited by the author’s name followed by the page number.
2 There is a problem with circularity when the definite description associated with a name also
contains a name (Kripke 81–82). For this reason, Kripke writes that a better example would be of
a person who "actually states a certain theorem, which he attributes to Gödel as the discoverer"
(Kripke 83). For the purpose of this paper, it should be understood that the name "the incom-
pleteness proof" inside the denoting phrase associated with Gödel should really be replaced with
Gödel's proof of arithmetic's incompleteness in its entirety.
4 JASONDAYLEY
only discussing the matter with Gödel. Before having a chance to show
anyone else, Mr. Schmidt mysteriously vanishes and is never found. Gödel,
who it turns out was not such a good friend, takes Schmidt's manuscript
and publishes it as his own. Now, when I say "Gödel was a mathematician"
and mean "the author of the incompleteness proof was a mathematician,"
do I actually mean to indicate that Schmidt, whom I have never heard of,
was a mathematician? This may be the case if I am using the name and asso-
ciated definite description in what Keith Donnellan called the referential
use; that is, if I mean to say that whoever authored the incompleteness
proof was a mathematician, but this is not always the case (Donnellan,
“Reference and Defininte Descriptions” 285). A clearer example may be
someone saying "I had Gödel's class at Princeton." Clearly this person does
not mean she had a class from Schmidt; so, there is a problem which the
descriptivist's must answer.
A descriptivist may respond to this apparent problem that the per-
son, who was able to refer to Gödel directly rather than referentially, knew
more about Gödel than just that he created the incompleteness proof.
Hence, she could have intended another definite description or only the
person who fits most of the properties she associates with the name
"Gödel." Rather than explain why a cluster of properties is no more con-
sistent in referring than a single property, let us modify the example to
someone who only knows of Gödel that he authored the incompleteness
proof and that he was introduced to him once at a party.3The day after the
party this man may say to his wife, "Last night I was introduced to Gödel."
Superficially, he could mean, "Last night I was introduced to the author of
the incompleteness proof," but he could not mean that last night he was
introduced to Schmidt, whom he has never heard of and certainly never
met. It may be objected that the reference does not hold in such situations
because the description is not of a necessary property and should not be
expected to work in counterfactual situations. However, it is undoubtable
that such situations, i.e. those in which we are mistaken as to whom a
description refers, occur in the actual world and we would merely have to
find one to show that this objection cannot hold. Furthermore, it would be
impossible to rationally believe that names refer using only necessary
3Kripke discusses the cluster theory in his book (Kripke 64–68).
BYGÖDELI DONOTMEANSCHMIDT 5
properties. Kripke admits that certain properties of a person are necessary
such as the time in which they lived (Kripke 62), their parents, or their
identity as a human (Kripke 46). Neither the time period of a person's life
nor their identity as a human being could ever pick out a unique individ-
ual;4 hence, such descriptions could never explain how a name is able to
refer directly to a unique individual. Perhaps if we gave the exact second of
a person's being born or that person’s birth order relative to the person’s
parents, i.e. second born of Michael and Susan Jones, we could pick out a
unique individual by necessary properties, but surely we do not know such
information about every person to whom we refer using a name.
One may object that a different type of definite description would
solve the problem. For instance, the partygoer may refer to Gödel as "the
man introduced to me as Gödel" rather than by his original knowledge of
Gödel as "the author of the incompleteness proof," but this at best
describes the picture Kripke gives for the way names work. The objector
may say that by "Gödel" I mean "the man called Gödel," but this is blatantly
circular and hence problematic (Kripke 72). If instead "Gödel" is to mean
"the person whom I learned from an acquaintance is called Gödel," then
this becomes an example of the picture Kripke gives. According to the alter-
native picture of naming given by Kripke, a person or object is ceremoni-
ously given a name.5It is only important here that there is a first use of the
name in which it is given to an object. The name is then told to others by
fixing the referent either by ostensive definition or by use of a definite
description. So, the partygoer learns the name of a specific object, in this
case a specific person, by being shown the reference, while in the original
example the name was learned by being told it refers to the person who
authored the incompleteness proof. In the first case, it seems obvious that
the partygoer refers to a certain person whether or not he has any property
other than being the man to whom I was introduced. In the second case,
the description used to fix the reference could have been faulty, but I still
4 While it may be that during a single second, or whatever unit of time one takes to be atomic,
only a single individual was born, it is epistemically impossible that anyone, even one present at
the delivery, could know this and use it for the purpose of referring. Since reference occurs as a
person uses a name or description, and no one could ever know they were picking out someone
uniquely by specifying the second they were born, the objection that unique reference by time of
birth may be possible if one were specific enough is erroneous.
5 While Kripke uses the image of a ceremony, it is unclear wheter he means more than ostensibly
assigning an arbitrary name.
6 JASONDAYLEY
understand Gödel to be Gödel and not Schmidt. Suppose I learned the
name "Gödel" from a Mr. Smith, who was introduced to the man by those
who named him, his parents.6Smith knows that I am not acquainted with
Gödel's parents but that I know something about math, so Smith states the
result of the incompleteness theorem and then that it was Gödel who
proved this. If we are all mistaken and Schmidt actually authored the proof,
then the name still refers, through a causal chain, back to Gödel himself.
This picture of how names work shows why a person, who was told that
Gödel is going to give a lecture and who only knows Gödel as the author
of the incompleteness proof, does not expect upon going to the lecture to
hear from Schmidt.
Searle asserts in "Proper Names and Intentionality," that Kripke has
mischaracterized the descriptivist theory and that his picture seems to only
work in a descriptivist way. Searle clarifies that the question these theories
are trying to answer is, "How in the utterance of a name does the speaker
succeed in referring to an object?" (Searle, “Proper Names and
Intentionality” 309).7 Searle goes on to characterize the descriptivist
answer: "The answer given by the descriptivist is that the speaker refers to
the object because and only because the object satisfies the Intentional con-
tent associated with the name" (Searle 309). Searle seems to believe, along
with what was inferred earlier from Strawson, that names are able to refer
to objects by use of a description which the name's speaker has in mind as
he uses the name. In other words, when I say the name 'Gödel," it is my
intention to speak of the person who authored the incompleteness theo-
rem, and so I am able to refer to that man with use of this name.
Searle tries to show that the causal theory is not a better picture of
the way names work by demonstrating that the causal theory relies essen-
tially on descriptivism in two ways. First, when a name is given in the ini-
tial naming ceremony, it must be given by description. When a man gives
an object a name he either gives an ostensive description to what is to
receive the name, like "this infant in our arms," or he gives a unique
6It will probably not be the case that most people learn the name Gödel from someone who
knew his parents, but there must always be some chain back to them. This is especially true
when one considers that Gödel learned his own name from his parents. In all cases, then, there
will be a chain of people who heard the name from someone who heard the name etc., until we
get to those who named the man Gödel.
7This article will henceforth be cited by the author’s name followed by the page number.
BYGÖDELI DONOTMEANSCHMIDT 7
description using known properties, like "the highest peak of that moun-
tain range." In the latter case, it would not even be important that the man
were acquainted with the thing named. It seems that Kripke would have to
admit this point, but this only shows an initial reliance on description, not
that this description must be in the mind of the person using the name in
every case. In fact, it surely is not since most uses of the name will not be
by those aware of the procedure of an object’s naming ceremony. Second,
Searle tries to show that the causal chain by which names are learned is not
free from descriptivist intentionality. Kripke mentions that a speaker must
have the intention to use the name the same way as the person from whom
he learned it. Hence, to use the name Gödel, which I have learned from
Mr. Smith, I must have as part of my intention the description "the person
referred to by Mr. Smith using the name 'Gödel'" (Searle 310).
We may now understand why Searle believes that Kripke's Gödel
example cannot be used against the descriptivist theory. Searle admits that
in the counterfactual situation given when I use the name "Gödel," I am
"referring to Gödel and not the man who satisfies this description" (Searle
318). However, Searle believes that the name must still carry the intentional
content "the person called Gödel by those from whom I have learned the
name." Now, there are times when the name is used in what Donnellan
calls the referential sense.8 For example, I may say that I believe Gödel's
proof was the most important achievement in math since Euclid. In this
case, it seems clear that by "Gödel" I mean whoever authored the proof of
incompleteness, whether or not it was actually Gödel. Therefore, whenever
I use the name Gödel, I have a definite description as part of my intention.
Thus, Kripke's theory can be reduced to descriptivism; hence, this example
and the larger picture of naming that it was intended to support cannot be
used to refute descriptivism.
Kripke's theory easily defends against Searle's response to the Gödel
example. It has been established that there are two types of descriptions
which may be part of a speaker's intention when using a name. First, there
is the type of descriptions classically used by descriptivists such as "the
author of the incompleteness proof." If this type of description were the
way in which a name achieved reference, then names are only used in the
attributive sense; they can only refer to whomever fits their implied definite
8Searle calls this "secondary aspect uses of proper names" (Searle 318).
8 JASONDAYLEY
description. However, the Gödel example shows that when I use a name, I
usually want the name to function like a referential definite description; I
want it to pick out a certain object no matter what descriptions that object
may actually fit. There may be examples where I want to use a name in an
attributive sense. In the statement, "Gödel's proof is the greatest achieve-
ment in math since Euclid," the name "Gödel" seems to mean whoever
wrote the proof rather than the actual man Gödel whether or not he was
the author. It should be noted, however, that the subject of this sentence is
not "Gödel," it is "Gödel's proof." This subject is a definite description
which functions referentially since it picks out a certain proof whether it
was actually created by Gödel or not. There may be another example in
which we look at a version of the incompleteness theorem and say, "Gödel
was a genius." This does seems to be attributive; it seems to mean that who-
ever wrote the proof was a genius. If Schmidt wrote the proof, then I mean
Schmidt was a genius. However, this is not the way I always use a name, nor
is it the most common way. It cannot, therefore, be said to generally be the
way in which names achieve reference. Furthermore, it seems that in most
cases of this last type, rather than saying that the speaker was right and
merely using the name "Gödel" referentially, we would usually say that the
speaker is mistaken. Here the Gödel example makes the problems of a
purely descriptivist theory of names apparent. When I say something like,
"Gödel taught at Princeton," if we were to understand "Gödel" as func-
tioning attributively, then it seems I mean that Schmidt taught at
Princeton. I clearly do not mean this. I mean that a specific person, to
whom we refer using "Gödel," taught at Princeton. In this case we want to
use the name referentially as the subject of a sentence, and as I have shown,
this is usually the case
Searle proposes another type of definite description which answers
the Gödel example. An example of this type would be like the partygoer's
description, "the person who was introduced to me as Gödel." This may be
stated more generally as "the person called Gödel in my community," to
avoid the problems of having forgotten where I learned the name Gödel
(Searle 310). It seems that when I say "Gödel taught at Princeton," I may
mean "the person called Gödel in my community taught at Princeton."
BYGÖDELI DONOTMEANSCHMIDT 9
Kripke admits that a person using a name he has learned must have an
intention to use the name in the way he heard it used. Searle interprets this
intention as a definite description of the partygoer's type. It seems that if
the name requires such a definite description in the intention of the
speaker to function, then the descriptivist theory is correct (Searle 310). In
fact, this points out how names could always function attributively, though
this type of description does not seem to be the type Frege, Russell, and
Strawson had in mind. Ignoring that this response by Searle seems ad hoc,
the question remains whether, after admitted that names require inten-
tionality, Kripke's Gödel example can be used to show that the descrip-
tivist theory of naming is faulty.
In explaining their theories, Frege, Russell, and Strawson never make
reference to a description like, "the person called Gödel in my commu-
nity." Perhaps this was because such a description is circular; it picks out the
name Gödel by a description which contains the name "Gödel." There may
be a question as to why this description seems to work in picking out the
reference if it is indeed circular. The description has this ability because it
does not refer to the object named; it refers to the causal chain by which
the name is learned. The description "the person called Gödel in my com-
munity" was used in place of "the person whose name I learned from Smith
was Gödel" to account for the fact that we may use a name when we are not
sure from whom we learned it. In any case, I, or the members of my com-
munity, have learned the name from someone and so what is meant in
this description is, "the person called Gödel by whomever I learned that
name from." So, what did that person mean when they told me the name
of the author of the incompleteness proof was Gödel? Normally, Smith
would mean "the person called Gödel by whomever I learned that name
from." Recall that in Mr. Smith's case, this means "the person called Gödel
by the parents of Gödel." Who do the parents mean when they use the
name Gödel or introduce this name to Gödel himself or to another per-
son? They mean "the person who, as an infant, I took in my arms and said,
'I name this infant Kurt Gödel,'" or however they pronounced the cere-
mony. Therefore, the name Gödel merely presents the person so named
and only secondarily requires an intention to use the name as it was
learned. This intention may translate into a definite description, but this
10 JASONDAYLEY
definite description is only a secondary requirement and in fact refers to
the causal chain from which the name was learned, not to Gödel himself
Kripke repeatedly mentions that this idea of a causal chain of naming does
not give a new theory of naming; it simply offers a better picture. The
Gödel example demonstrates that this picture is better. To say that names
achieve reference by the use of a definite description must be wrong if we
mean that they use a description like "author of the incompleteness theo-
rem." To say that names achieve reference by the use of a definite descrip-
tion is deceptive if we mean that they use a description like "the person
called Gödel in my community." If this second type were the type of
description used in the vast majority of cases, to achieve reference, then
Searle's descriptivist theory, which includes such descriptions, is deceptive.
The idea that the name "Gödel" presents the object so named directly, and
that this name was learned through a causal chain is more accurate. A
description like "the person called Gödel in my community," may still be
part of our intention, but stating that this description is the primary means
by which the name Gödel receives reference is problematic.
Kripke's Gödel example shows that the causal picture of proper
names is better than the picture given by the descriptivists. If in using the
name "Gödel," part of my intention is the definite description by which the
reference was fixed when I learned the name, such as "the author of the
incompleteness theorem," then there are clearly cases in which it seems I
should mean Schmidt when I actually mean Gödel. If instead, the only
description which is part of my intention in using this name is "the person
who was called Gödel by whoever first taught me that name," then there
will be no such mistake. Kripke's picture shows that names only rely sec-
ondarily on intended definite descriptions. While this shows that there is
some merit in the descriptivist theory, it is clear that saying this theory
explains how names are able to refer to objects is deceptive. When using a
name, a person may require a definite description as part of her intention
if the name is able to achieve reference, or she may require a definite
description to fix the referent of a new name. However, the Gödel example
shows that in Kripke's picture names achieve reference only as they are
learned from a causal chain, giving a better picture of the way names actu-
ally work.
Works Cited Or Consulted
Donnellan, Keith. "Reference and Definite Descriptions." Philosophical
Review. 75(1966): 281–304.
Frege, Gottlob. "On Sense and Nominatum." In A.P. Martinich, The
Philosophy of Language. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press,
2001. 199–211.
Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press, 1980.
Russell, Bertrand. "Mr. Strawson on Referring." Mind. 66 (1957): 385–389.
Russell, Bertrand. "On Denoting." Mind. 14 (1905): 479–493
Searle, John. "Proper Names and Intentionality." In A.P. Martinich, The
Philosophy of Language. 4th ed. New York: Oxford University Press,
2001. 308–323.
Strawson, P.F. "On Referring." Mind. 59 (1950): 320–344.