Aporiavol. 16 no. 2—2006
Democritus' Parmenidean Influence
JASONDAYLEY
D
emocritus is famous for a theory of atoms which heavily influ-
enced later philosophical and scientific movements. Despite this
influence, there is debate over what Democritus intended in
developing and explaining his theory. As with any theory, understanding
Democritus' theoretical intentions is aided by a better understanding of
Democritus' influences. Besides Leucippus, whose atomism is too indis-
tinguishable from Democritus' to explain the origin of either theory,
Democritus' clearest influences are Parmenides and the Eleatic philoso-
phers who followed him.1 The debate over this Parmenidean influence
seems to focus on which points Democritus is arguing against Parmenides
and on which points he is merely adapting Parmenidean principles into
atomism. Democritus accepted Parmenides' ontology as the basis for his
own, modifying the older theory only as was necessary to avoid contradic-
tions arising from his own assumptions regarding plurality, motion, and
change.
A discussion of the complex history of philosophy leading from
Parmenides to Democritus will not be necessary. A series of responses to
Parmenides were developed by some of the great early Greek philosophers,
and it is likely that some such responders as Melissus and Zeno, closer con-
temporaries of Democritus than Parmenides, had a more direct influence
1Some have argued that Democritus was not influenced at all by Parmenides, but that the prin-
ciple source of his theory was in Pythagoreanism (Bury, "The Origin of Atomism" 3). Better
scholarship regarding Pythagoras has made this idea doubtful rendering such arguments unpop-
ular.
Jason Dayley is a senior majoring in philosophy with a minor in logic at Brigham
Young University. After graduation in December 2006, he will attend law school.
52 JASONDAYLEY
on him than Parmenides himself. The complexities of these relationships,
however, are outside the scope of this essay which seeks only to establish
that the principles of Democritus' ontology were based on those of
Parmenides, no matter how these principles were transmitted. Further, I
will not attempt to show that Democritus explicitly accepted or denied that
he was adopting Parmenidean principles; I will merely show that he did use
them.
Comparing Parmenides' monism to Democritus' atomism will be
aided by attempting to recreate the line of reasoning by which Parmenides
determined each of the four properties necessary for Being. Parmenides
begins by saying that there are two ways of inquiry, what-is and what-is-not,
and since we cannot think of or talk about what-is-not, the only way of
inquiry is to investigate what-is (DK 28B2).2Therefore, since all that exists
is what-is there is nothing which could divide what-is into pieces; hence, all
of existence must be a single unified Being. Parmenides said that Being has
four essential properties. First, there is nothing which Being could have
been born from and nothing which it could die into. Hence, Being is eter-
nal, having never been generated and being imperishable. Second, Being is
neither divisible nor more concentrated in one part than another, for it is
completely full. Third, Being is motionless because it has no place to move
into and no force to act upon it. Fourth, Being is complete, extending
equally in all directions (DK 28B8). Parmenides describes this fourth con-
dition of completeness in such a way that it could easily be confused for a
restatement of the second property of homogeneity. This confusion is
abated by the consensus of some commentators that the fourth property is
better understood as a possession of all perfections (Schick, “Check and
Spur: Parmenides' Concept of What Is." 172).
Simplicius said of Leucippus the atomist, "Although he partook of
Parmenides' philosophy, [he] did not pursue the same path about existing
things as Parmenides… but the opposite" (DK 78A8). While Parmenides
had posited that all reality was one motionless and constant Being,
Leucippus believed in an infinite plurality of existent objects, the reality of
motion and change, and even the existence of what-is-not. Democritus,
who followed Leucippus in the atomist tradition, also believed that reality
2Fragments and testimonies included in Diels-Kranz will be cited as DK and the number
assigned by Diels-Kranz to that fragment or testimony.
DEMOCRITUS’ PARMENIDEANINFLUENCE 53
consisted of an infinite number of objects divided by void or what-is-not
(DK 78A8). However, a careful study of Democritus' atomism will show
that this theory is not, as Simplicius says, the opposite of Parmenides' the-
ory. Instead, atomism is both friendly to and reliant upon the ontological
principles proposed by Parmenides.
One testimony of Democritus is useful in establishing this point:
Now Democritus, taking principles testified of by sensa-
tion, that there is division and plurality in things, as well as
motion, on the basis of these he introduces the void, con-
structing the obscure from the evident. For if there is division,
he says, and plurality in things, there is void; but there is divi-
sion and multiplicity; hence there is void. He takes the condi-
tional premise just like Parmenides, but not the minor premise.
For Parmenides maintained that there is no void, which is
obscure, but Democritus that there is multiplicity and division.
And similarly with motion: if there is motion, there is void;
but there is motion; hence there is void. Here too he takes the
same conditional premise as Parmenides, but not the same
minor premise. (Philoponus, On Generation and Corruption 155)
In this passage, Democritus directly addresses an argument made by
Melissus against motion and change (DK 30B7). Melissus made this argu-
ment using Parmenidean principles, and Democritus does disagree with
Melissus in general. However, it does not necessarily follow that
Democritus directly disagrees with Parmenides' basic principles. As this
quotation explains, Democritus' empirically-based belief assumes that there
must be motion and change. Using Parmenides' hypothetical statements
backward, Democritus showed that there must be a plurality of real objects
and a void. Of course Parmenides would not agree with Democritus' con-
clusion. Still, this begins to show Democritus' reliance on Parmenides, for
it was Parmenides' reasoning which determined the implications of assum-
ing motion and change in the world. This reliance may seem superficial
since Democritus has used Parmenides' reasoning only to show that
Parmenides must have been wrong. However, had Democritus decided that
Parmenides had erred in the basic principles of his theory, it does not seem
54 JASONDAYLEY
likely that he would have been a strong advocate of a theory so reliant on
Parmenidean reasoning. In other words, if Democritus had decided that
Parmenides' theory was absolutely wrong, he would have needed some
other basis from which to draw the inference that void must exist.
A stronger case can be made that Democritus must have regarded
Parmenides' principles as generally correct based on evidence that the basic
principles of Democritus' ontology were borrowed from Parmenides. Most
commentators would agree that Democritus' atoms seem to be very much
like "little pieces of Parmenidean Being" because they possess each of the
four characteristics of Being discussed earlier (Palmer, Looking at Philosophy
37). Democritus emphasized that atoms were uncreated and indestructible
for the same reason as Parmenides; they were the only existent stuff and as
such had nothing to be born of or die into (Stokes, One and Many in
Presocratic Philosophy 231).2 To avoid the problems of infinite divisibility
proposed by the followers of Parmenides, atoms were indivisible both in
the sense of being physically too strong to be split and in the sense of their
not having parts which could be separated (Stokes 235–236). As with
Being, since atoms have no parts, they must be completely homogeneous,
so they also possess the second property. Parmenides argued that Being is
motionless only in that there is nothing for it to move into, relative to, or
as a reaction to. Externally, separate atoms can act for each other in these
three ways, thereby explaining the motion which Democritus observed in
the world. However, since atoms have no parts, it seems that they must be
internally motionless. Finally, since the totality of atoms constitutes all
objects and all atoms are alike except for inessential properties like size and
shape (McKirahan,Philosophy Before Socrates 308), atoms must be complete,
containing all perfections.
One possible objection which must be dealt with immediately is that
Democritus admits void as a separate thing from atoms; hence, we can say
neither that there is no substance which atoms could be born of or die into
nor that they are complete, possessing all that exists. On the first count, it
is clear that Democritus held that atoms were uncreated and imperishable
(Stokes 231). Furthermore, both ideas can be refuted in that void is not a
substance but the lack of substance. For atoms to be born of void would be
2This book will be cited by the author’s name followed by the page number.
DEMOCRITUS’ PARMENIDEANINFLUENCE 55
as intolerable as what-is being born from what-is-not. Finally, void neces-
sarily has no properties, so it cannot have a property which atoms do not
(Stokes 235).
One may question this answer to the objection based on Democritus'
quotation translated as, "thing is no more real than nothing" (DK 68B156).
One might infer from this statement that void, while having an equal onto-
logical status with the atoms, may in fact have properties which atoms do
not, though it is hard to conceive of a decidable property of void. One of
these properties may be the ability of void to create, destroy, or assimilate
atoms. This is a misinterpretation of this quotation. The Greek word trans-
lated as "thing" is actually not a Greek word in the dialect used by
Democritus. Instead, it is a nonsense word created by chopping the nega-
tive prefix from the word used for nothing as we would get the word "hing."
The quotation would then appropriately be translated "Hing is no more
real than nothing." This may be a response to Melissus who argued using
Parmenidean principles that since empty space is necessary for motion and
empty space is nothing and therefore does not exist, there is no motion. In
essence, Democritus may mean to say that if nothing necessarily does not
exist then it would follow that what necessarily does exist is nothing's gram-
matical opposite "hing." Since "hing" does not refer to something which
exists we are lead to a contradiction and must admit the existence of noth-
ing or void (Matson, “Democritus, Fragment 156” 29).3This statement of
Democritus, then, is not a claim for the reality of empty space but a state-
ment that void is in essence non-reality or the equivalent of Parmenides'
what-is-not (Matson 26–29). Democritus still seems to oppose Parmenides
in saying that there is a void, but this objection will be dealt with later in
this paper. What has been established here is that atoms possess all the
properties which Parmenides attributes to Being, and that these properties
are said to be necessary of atoms by the same reasoning which Parmenides
used to say they are necessary of Being. Therefore, Democritus' theory is
based on the principles and reasoning of Parmenides.
There is a second objection to ascribing the properties of Being to
Democritus' atoms. It has been admitted from the beginning that
Democritus accepted motion as a real event in the universe, contrary to the
Eleatic denial of this motion. One may question how this could be admitted
3This article will be cited by the author’s name followed by the page number.
56 JASONDAYLEY
while saying that Democritus incorporated the property of motionlessness
into his atomic theory. However, it must be noted that it is possible for
Democritus to believe in the motion of one atom relative to others without
accepting that atoms have internal motion. Democritus' presentation of
atoms which are eternal and changeless seems to render the idea of atoms
with internal motion impossible, though there is no known writing of
Democritus where he actually states that atoms are internally motionless.
This confusion is based on a broader misconception. It is not the complete
set of atoms which have the properties of Parmenides' Being but each atom
as an individual. Democritus' theoretical departure from Parmenides on
this point, then, is centered on his accepting pluralism, not on his accept-
ing motion, so the idea that Democritus' atoms possessed each of the four
properties of Parmenides Being is preserved.
Democritus did not accept Parmenidean principles and reasoning
because of convention but because they were logically necessary to his
atomism. Atoms were said to be the underlying reality. Objects in the world
could be created, destroyed, divided, move internally and externally, and be
incomplete. Parmenides and Democritus both believed that this could not
be the way the ultimate reality is, as was shown by the properties they
assigned to Being and the atoms respectively. If this were how reality was
ultimately, then questions like "From what was the first object created?"
would be unanswerable. The underlying reality, then, would have to be
uncreated, indestructible, indivisible, motionless, and complete. However,
this is contrary to experience. This is likely why Parmenides wrote "do not
let habit born from much experience compel you along this way…but judge
by reason" (DK 28B7). Democritus did not have this luxury; he assumed
principles of change and motion based on experience. Atomism answers
this challenge by positing that the entire sensible world is made up of par-
ticles which have these properties. Because Democritus was reliant on
Parmenides for his theory's basic principles, his ultimate reality necessarily
had the properties of Parmenides' Being.
Some may question why Democritus followed such a path if he fully
accepted Parmenides' principles. I accept one great difference in the theory
of Parmenides and Democritus. Democritus assumed motion and change
were real and concluded what necessarily followed from this assumption
DEMOCRITUS’ PARMENIDEANINFLUENCE 57
using Parmenides' logic. Simply put, "the Atomists were…accommodating
Parmenidean logic to the evidence of the senses" (Stokes 233). Democritus
saw that this did not free him from admitting that the ultimate reality must
have the four properties of Being, and so he developed atomism which
answered both this requirement and what he learned from experience. He
may in fact have been attempting to show that a theory could be consistent
with Parmenides' theory while admitting the motion, change, and plurality
of objects experienced in the actual world.
There remains one objection to my thesis which must be answered,
for it seems that Democritus contradicts Parmenides not only by permit-
ting plurality, motion, and change but also by admitting void or what-is-not
as a type of reality. It is necessary for Democritus to affirm that the void is
in some sense real to permit his atoms to move, for they must have some-
thing to move into. After all, it is a belief in motion and change which
required Democritus to not simply adopt Parmenides theory in its entirety.
However, it is questionable whether Democritus' affirming void actually
contradicts Parmenides. Two separate views would say that it does not.
First, Thomas Knight wrote that Parmenides' denying what-is-not is an epis-
temological concern which shows nothing of Parmenides' beliefs of the
actual world. Knight explained his argument:
It may be said that [Parmenides'] doctrine [of Being] is both
logically and temporally prior to the problem of Substance.
Being and not-being are his terms. To equate these terms to
body and void is to identify ontology and cosmology, and only
by equating these terms can he be said to have denied void.
(Knight, “Parmenides and the Void” 525)
According to this view, then, Parmenides did not deny void in the
actual world, but only denied the possibility of knowing about it.
Democritus presented a more practical view of the world, in essence, a cos-
mology built from Parmenides' ontology. Parmenides may have allowed the
existence of void in the type of theory presented by Democritus.
Rudolph Siegel responded that this view is questionable because it is
not clear that it reflects Parmenides' actual intentions. While Parmenides'
theory was unique in its time, it is more likely that his theory was meant
4This article will be cited by the author’s last name followed by the page number.
58 JASONDAYLEY
more directly as a response to previous cosmological theories (Siegel 265).4
Furthermore, Parmenides presents Being as reality in its entirety, and,
given this, it seems unlikely that he did not mean for facts about ultimate
reality to imply facts about the actual world (Siegel 264–265).
Siegel wrote further that there is a more plausible way in which
Parmenides can be interpreted as accepting void. Parmenides describes
Being as bound by laws to a fixed position and as such, unmovable. If
Being were all that existed, then motion would be impossible because there
would be nothing to move relative to. What then could Parmenides have
meant in saying that Being was bound? As stated earlier, one of
Parmenides' reasons for saying that Being must be motionless is that it
would have nothing to move relative to. However, this may be a misinter-
pretation of Parmenides, since the reason that there is nothing which could
cause Being to move would be sufficient to establish its motionlessness
(Siegel 266). Moreover, there is little evidence that Parmenides believed
Being to be spatially infinite, and whatever surrounded Being must not be
Being so it could be interpreted to be not-Being. That Democritus under-
stood Parmenides' theory in this way is evidenced by his asserting that
atoms are surrounded by void. Therefore, it is likely that Democritus was
not contradicting, or at least was not intending to contradict, Parmenides
by presenting void as a real entity.
Some scholars may respond to both of these theories by pointing out
that Democritus must have contradicted Parmenides on the point of void.
Four separate testimonies state explicitly that both Leucippus and
Democritus equated the void with "what-is-not" (DK 68A45, 67A8, 68A38,
68A40). Democritus accepted that void exists, so he must have accepted
that what-is-not exists. Parmenides states explicitly that what-is-not does not
exist (DK 28B6). Furthermore, in the fragment numbered 28B6 by Diels-
Kranz, Parmenides shows how his epistemological belief that we cannot
discover what-is-not can be translated into an ontological belief that what-
is-not does not exist, thereby refuting Knight. Finally, all of this leads to the
conclusion that Parmenides did not believe what-is-not to exist, and so any
line of reasoning which shows that Parmenides did not refute void, which
Democritus equated with what-is-not, cannot be correct, including Siegel's.
However, there is a workable answer to the objection that
DEMOCRITUS’ PARMENIDEANINFLUENCE 59
Democritus contradicts Parmenides on the question of the existence of
what-is-not. As was shown in the two failed answers, Parmenides cannot be
said to accept what-is-not as existing, and Democritus equates void with
what-is-not. The two are reconciled on this point in that Democritus does
not believe that what-is-not exists either. To understand this, we need only
return to our discussion of Democritus' phrase "thing is no more real than
nothing" (DK 68B156) or "hing exists no more than nothing" (Matson 29).
As was stated before, this statement should be interpreted as Democritus'
both equating void with what-is-not and stating against Melissus that what-
is-not is not necessarily non-existent. How can one make sense of this claim
that void is-not but does in some sense exist? This is "a classic example of a
man reduced to paradox because [he is] unable to find the language in
which to say 'in a sense'" (Stokes 219). Void is necessary to atomism both in
its purpose of explaining motion and change and in its method of dividing
Being, for it is void which separates the atoms. Democritus accepts that
void exists in the sense that empty space is a part of the real world. He
rejects void's existence in the sense of existence which Parmenides had used
to ascribe necessary properties to what exists or what-is. Separating these
senses of existence may go against the spirit of Parmenides' statement,
"Never shall this prevail, that things that are not are" (DK 28B7), but it
seems clear that Democritus is following Parmenides restriction as best he
can. The fact that Democritus separated these two senses of existence
shows that he attempted to comply as closely as possible with Parmenides
while accepting his three points of departure: plurality, motion, and
change.
It is debatable through what lines Parmenidean principles made their
way into Democritus' atomism. However, it is clear that Democritus
accepted and used Parmenidean principles to create his atomism and that
these principles are necessary to his theory's consistency. No matter how he
knew or understood Parmenides, Democritus used Parmenides' theory for
the building blocks of his own. He did not do this, as is traditionally
thought, by seeking to refute Parmenides. Rather, he assumed that the plu-
rality, motion, and change which he experienced were real and then
reshaped Parmenidean principles to allow them.
Works Cited
Bury, R.G. "The Origin of Atomism." The Classical Review 30 (1916): 1–4.
Knight, Thomas S. "Parmenides and the Void." Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research19 (June 1959): 524–528.
Mc Kirahan, Richard D. Jr. Philosophy Before Socrates. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett Publishing Company, inc., 1994.
Matson, W.I. "Democritus, Fragment 156." The Classical Quarterly. 13
(1963): 26–29.
Palmer, Donald. Looking at Philosophy. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill, 2001.
Philoponus, John. On Generation and Corruption. 155.
Schick, Thomas. "Check and Spur: Parmenides' Concept of What Is."
The Classical Journal60 (January 1965): 170–173.
Siegel, Rudolph E. " Parmenides and the Void (In Discussion)." Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research. 22 (1960): 264–266.
Stokes, Michael C. One and Many in Presocratic Philosophy. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1971.