Aporia vol. 21 no. 1—2011
Trauma and Event in Merleau-Ponty’s
Reading of Mythical Time
Evan Edwards
At least beginning with the Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-
Ponty was critical of the prevailing phenomenological under-
standings of time. In the chapter “Temporality,” Merleau-Ponty
critiques Husserl, who sees time as a series of Abschattungen that overlap
each other.1 This theory is not satisfactory for Merleau-Ponty because al-
though it takes into account the subject’s positioning of one moment in
time onto another, it does not sufficiently do away with the idea that an
event is a thing that can be objectively studied. As Raphaël Gély points
out in his essay, “La Question de L’Événement dans la Phénoménologie
de Merleau-Ponty,” “what interests Merleau-Ponty is the institution of the
event and not first and fundamentally the institution of the subject in
the event” (355). In other words, the problem of the event for Merleau-Pon-
ty is properly situated around an investigation of how the event comes to
structure our human world. Generally speaking, this paper will investigate
how the event figures into the philosophy of Merleau-Ponty, particularly in
his later thought.
The first section is an introduction to Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy of
time. Focusing primarily on his later thought, I will begin by introducing
the problems of traditional phenomenological theories of time, drawing out
the significance of Merleau-Ponty’s critique of the objective mode of inquiry
1 Abschattungen is notoriously difficult to translate. Husserl uses the term to describe the multitude
of nuanced “shades” of a phenomenon.
Evan Edwards is a senior specializing in philosophy and gender studies at the
University of North Carolina–Asheville. His interests include contemporary French
philosophy, philosophy of space, metaphysics, and radical politics.
38 Evan Edwards
that he sees in his predecessors. I will continue by looking to Mauro Car-
bone’s work on Merleau-Ponty’s understanding of “mythical time” that
emerges in his last few writings. This work gives a particularly lucid ac-
count of the differences between Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy of time and
that of Husserl and Bergson. Finally, in this section, I will begin to try to
determine the place of events in our overall understanding of time. These
background considerations will be important to understanding the bulk of
this paper’s argument.
In the second section, I will show some of the similarities that Merleau-
Ponty’s situation of the event in time bears to the idea of trauma in the later
psychoanalytic theories of Sigmund Freud. Looking to Freud’s analysis of
the Wolfman and Slavoj Zizek’s reading of this interpretation, I will argue
that the structure of mythical time calls for the same kind of retroactive
signification that one finds in the traumatic event. Finally, in this section,
I will draw out the complications that this analogy entails for Merleau-
Ponty’s thinking of the event.
In the final section, I will look to Gély’s paper to situate our reading of
Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy of the event with more contemporary theories.
In this comparison, it will become clear where Merleau-Ponty’s thinking
of the event coincides with and where it deviates from these contemporary
theories. Though my conclusions will be fundamentally opposed to Gély’s
thesis, I will use his paper to demonstrate more clearly the possibility for
a reconsideration of Merleau-Ponty’s work through a Badiouan lens.
Merleau-Ponty’s Critique of Reflective Theories of Time
As early as the Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty looked to
Marcel Proust as a guidepost on the way to a coherent theory of the relation
of the sensible and the intelligible. In the first chapter of Mauro Carbone’s
book of essays, The Thinking of the Sensible, he argues that toward the end
of his career, Merleau-Ponty moved even further away from Husserl and
Bergson than he had in the Phenomenology of Perception. Carbone suggests
that in his earlier critiques of Bergson’s and Husserl’s theories of time,
what Merleau-Ponty develops is more of a clarification and refinement of
their theories—a critique—than an innovative philosophy. It is as Merleau-
Ponty’s thought matures that we see a more properly Merleau-Pontian the-
ory of time emerge (Carbone 3). This theory, as Carbone explains, posits
“mythical time” as a serious alternative to the serial theory that Merleau-
Ponty still saw in Husserl and Bergson.
Mythical time, the “time of half-sleep,” is “properly Merleau-Pontian”
because it refers to a thinking of time as neither continuous nor discontin-
uous, but existing as an “existential eternity” (Carbone 12). This eternity is
Trauma and EvEnT 39
always already there and is always “at the first day” because there is, strictly
speaking, no line of “nows” that can be traced back to what would be “pre-
vious days” (Carbone 12). The quasi-discontinuous narrative that mythical
time presents is a synthesis of events both distant and present. This confu-
sion of distance and presence, of past and present, as when one is still in a
“state of half-sleep,” problematizes the serial account of time that Merleau-
Ponty saw his predecessors clinging to.
This synthesis of events, however, is not active; one cannot refer back
to a point in the past where one says, “I will create a memory and a refer-
ence point in this ‘now’ which I will refer back to sometime in the future.”
Rather, there is a “passive synthesis” of time, a seeming contradiction in
terms that Merleau-Ponty explains by reference to a contact with “wild Be-
ing” prior to subject and object. In the next part of this section, I will at-
tempt to show what Merleau-Ponty and Carbone mean by this wild Being
by quoting Proust as well as Merleau-Ponty.
In the Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty quotes a passage
from Proust in which the author describes, at great length, the process of
“waking up.” Proust writes, “when I awoke like this, and my mind struggled
in an unsuccessful attempt to discover where I was, everything revolved
around me through the darkness: things, places, years” (PP 211). This de-
scription, according to Merleau-Ponty, is an ontologically significant and
beautiful piece of prose. The passage goes on to describe the ways which
the author is unsure whether he is the mind constituting the room or it
is in fact the other way around. Before an intentional consciousness foists
structure on this wild Being, there is no distinct subject or object, no dis-
tinct past or present, etc. As Carbone describes it, the past and present are
simultaneous (8).
Prior to the creation of a cohesive Gestalt, the scene in Proust disori-
ents the author and the reader because it is unclear whether the seer is con-
stituting the room or the room is constituting the seer. This disorientation
of seer and seen, of subject and object, mirrors the description of wild Be-
ing that Merleau-Ponty gives at the beginning of the chapter of The Visible
and the Invisible called “The Intertwining—The Chiasm.” Applied to expe-
rience as a whole, we might say that for Merleau-Ponty, embodied time is a
time of half-sleep where experience is passively synthesized. The “passivity”
of this “activity” (synthesis) is problematic for the transcendental subject.
Indeed, it displaces phenomenal consciousness as the constituting force in
the world. The mutation of the relationship between humanity and Being
is found in this disintegration of the transcendental subject, as well as in
Merleau-Ponty’s critique of serial time. Experience without reflection, or
as Merleau-Ponty says, a “life without Erlebnisse, without interiority,” is pre-
cisely what seems to have been germinating in Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy
at least since the Phenomenology of Perception (VI 243).
40 Evan Edwards
When we understand Merleau-Ponty’s later philosophy of time, we
can begin to extricate from it a theory of the event. If, as Merleau-Ponty
entreats us, we are to abandon the serial understanding of time in favor of a
“mythical” understanding, how are we to understand the existence of recol-
lections and histories which chronicle when and where certain happenings
occurred? It seems doubtful that Merleau-Ponty would be so bold as to sug-
gest that the French Revolution did not happen just over 200 years ago or
that prior to this event there wasn’t a period when France was a monarchy.
To admit such a claim would be to collapse into a revisionist relativism that
would be so radical that it would border on being incomprehensible. So
how can we situate the existence of the event of the revolution in relation to
ourselves while continuing to reject the serial understanding of time?
In order to begin answering this question, let us venture the following
proposition: what Merleau-Ponty rejects in the reflective theories of time
is the possibility of understanding, once and for all, the chain of causality
that led from one event to another. We find an analogue of this proposi-
tion in Merleau-Ponty’s own statement about the relation of reflection and
perceptual faith. He writes that “a philosophy of reflection, as methodic
doubt and as a reduction of the openness upon the world to ‘spiritual acts’,
to intrinsic relations between the idea and its ideate, is thrice untrue to
what it means to elucidate: untrue to the visible world, to him who sees it,
and to his relations with the other ‘visionaries’” (VI 39). In this passage,
Merleau-Ponty shows that limiting the phenomenon to a reflective explana-
tion of causality and description fails to capture the essentially open nature
of the phenomenon itself. In the same way, by precisely describing the rela-
tions between events, the serial theorist lays claim to absolute knowledge
of historical processes.
What we must understand, then, is that there is inevitably something
irreducible in the event and that this irreducibility is a restriction not only
on the determination of the significance of an event, but also on the deter-
mination of its place in the historical montage. In other words, the event
must be understood as indefinite, unable to be said entirely, and open
(perhaps infinitely) in its relation to the world.
In this section, I have given a summary of Merleau-Ponty’s later
thinking of time. This philosophy of time, as we have seen, explicitly rejects
serial understandings of temporality in favor of an understanding of tem-
porality as a “time of half-sleep” (Carbone 1). This theory interrupts the se-
rial understanding by positing the indeterminacy of evental causation and
significance in order to encourage us to understand the event not as a mark
on a time line or as a point on a field, which even Husserl may have ad-
mitted. Rather, the event is more accurately described as “horizonal” than
as “horizontal.” Rather than moving in one direction—horizontally—the
Trauma and EvEnT 41
event emerges as a horizon of meaning. In the next section, I will argue that
we can give an even more accurate description of Merleau-Ponty’s reading
of the event by considering its similarity to what Slavoj Zizek identifies as
Freud’s second theory of trauma.
Trauma and the Event
According to Zizek, a major shift occurs in how Freud thinks of trau-
ma between The Ego and the Id and Three Case Histories. Before this time,
Freud thought of the traumatic event as an outside disturbance, something
that came into the patient’s psychical life as an alien intruder. As Freud’s
thinking progressed, he realized that the relationship between event and
ordinary life is precisely the opposite. Zizek looks to Freud’s analysis of the
Wolfman to make his point:
His analysis of [Wolfman], his famous Russian patient,
isolated as the early traumatic event that marked his life
the fact that, as a child of one and a half, he witnessed the
parental coitus a tergo. However, originally, when this
scene took place, there was nothing traumatic in it: far
from shattering the child, he just inscribed it into his
memory as an event the sense of which was not clear at
all to him. Only years later, when the child became ob-
sessed with the question “where do children come from”
and started to develop infantile sexual theories, did he
draw out this memory in order to use it as a traumatic
scene embodying the mystery of sexuality. (Zizek)
Zizek likens this shift to the one made by Einstein between the special and
general theory of relativity. Whereas in the special theory, the curvature
of space is caused by the intrusion of matter, in the general theory, the
curvature is primary and matter serves only to herald its presence (Zizek).
In the same way, for the earlier Freud, the traumatic event is the thing that
reorganizes the space of the patient’s life. By the 1920s, however, Freud had
come to see the traumatic event as the sign of the curvature of the space of
the subject. In other words, rather than the Wolfman being shaped by the
event of witnessing his parents in coitus, Freud sees that the significance
of the traumatic event lies in its signaling of the theories of sexuality that
Wolfman had developed in order to answer his youthful wondering. The
event, then, has retroactive significance.
We see in Merleau-Ponty’s theories of mythical time an analogue
of this later idea of Freud. Frank Chouraqui’s paper, “Thickness and the
Vertical Unfolding of Time in the Notes of May 1959,” cues us into this
insight. Chouraqui sees Merleau-Ponty’s theory of the event as the invisible
42 Evan Edwards
sediment of significance. I take this to mean that events are the stuff lying
beneath what we find significant. He looks to the note called The Visible
and the Invisible from May 1959 to make this point. In the note, Merleau-
Ponty writes that “this reduction to the myth presupposes a ground of non-
mythical positivity which is another myth” and that rather, “one has to
understand that myth, mystification, alienation etc. are second-order con-
cepts” (VI 188). These are second-order concepts in the sense that there is
a real of the event which is not clear to us (in the note mentioned above,
the real that Merleau-Ponty refers to is Madame de La Fayette’s novel La
Princesse de Clèves) but which nonetheless contributes to our understand-
ing of social life. Merleau-Ponty assigns to this significance, this invisible
significance, the name “myth” precisely because it is not immanent to us.
Chouraqui writes that “a myth is a myth because it is not about sedimented
facts, but about Being itself: mythologization is an exemplification of Being
as sedimentative process” (15). It is only when an event has settled into the
sediment of history that its real significance can be determined.
In terms of our discussion of trauma above, we can say that by looking
at the literal, serial event of La Princesse de Clèves, we are simply looking at
the event as insignificant. It is much like the Wolfman looking at the event
of seeing his parents in their nighttime act. We see the value of the literal
novel as symptomatic of the curvature of the social sphere that came after
it. There are, then, two senses of La Princesse de Clèves as event. First, there
is the sense in which it is a visible novel written in the 17th century. This
sense, however, is one that is exactly situated in serial time, a concept which
we have seen is unsatisfactory for Merleau-Ponty. It is in the second sense,
then, that we find the truer meaning of the event. In this second sense La
Princesse de Clèves is a myth whose value is determined retroactively and
ambiguously. This determination, as we said above, is invisible. Just as the
curvature of space in Einstein’s general theory is the invisible heralded by
the visible matter, the truest sense of the event for Merleau-Ponty is given
in the invisible sediment that La Princesse has left in the sedimentative
process of Being. This means, as Chouraqui suggests in his paper, that the
event itself is absolutely invisible to us.
At the same time, Merleau-Ponty gestures toward a theory in which
the event is left entirely open. We see evidence for this in his letter to
Sartre in which he accuses Sartre of denying history its “right of rectifica-
tion” (Davis 42).2 Much of Merleau-Ponty’s philosophy of history rests on
the problem he introduces of the distinction between past and present,
between past events and present events. Who, he suggests, is to say that
we have said all there is to say about the French Revolution, or even the
2 Special thanks to Dr. Duane Davis for directing me to this passage.
Trauma and EvEnT 43
October Revolution? Although this critique of Sartre may be unfair, it is
clear that for Merleau-Ponty, the distance that Sartre seems to put between
us and historical events is too great, and the event is in fact more immanent
than we ordinarily assume.
We see, then, the problem inherent in Merleau-Ponty’s thinking of
the event. On one hand, it is entirely invisible to us, and so it is separated
from us as an object of inquiry. We cannot rightly look at Madame de La
Fayette’s novel and say that we can find its meaning in the text itself. On
the other hand, the event is entirely immanent to us. It is always open to
our interpretation and has the “right of rectification” which Merleau-Ponty
called for in his letter to Sartre.
In my correspondence with Chouraqui about his paper, he has sug-
gested that the way to reconcile these positions is through a kind of psy-
choanalysis. By psychoanalyzing the significance of the event, one brings to
consciousness the invisible ground of sedimentation as a way of determin-
ing its meaning. While the event may be “entirely invisible” because it is, as
Gilles Deleuze would say, “a past which never was present,” it is always pos-
sible to bring that very fact to consciousness in order to critically investigate
what is otherwise taken as given in the curvature of our social space (104).
Rather than simply investigating the text itself, we ought to look at the text
as the event to which we have retroactively assigned value.
Another example that Merleau-Ponty himself draws on, in The Vis-
ible and the Invisible, comes from another work by Proust, Swann’s Way. In
the novel, refined socialite Charles Swann is deeply moved by hearing a
particular violin phrase in a sonata by the composer Vinteuil. In fact, “le
petite phrase,” as it is called, becomes an important part of Swann’s life
and comes to symbolize his half-willing love for Odette de Crécy, a former
courtesan. For Swann, Vinteuil’s “little phrase” conjures up a “past which
never was present,” that is, the non-real moment which passed between
Swann and Odette when he realized the love he had for her (VI 286). In
our terminology, for Merleau-Ponty, the retroactive assignment of value
to this non-existent event is a symptom of the curvature of Swann’s life.
Proust describes, however, the way that Vinteuil’s little phrase is retroac-
tively assigned the value that, in the case of La Princesse, was assigned to
the novel itself. The tumultuous relationship between the two inevitably
goes sour when Swann realizes Odette’s unpleasant nature. According to
certain readers of Proust, the author does not resolve the conflict between
Swann and Odette. Rather, the story trails off, never achieving a détente
or direction. This example, obviously, is quite different from any that we
have given thus far. If, as we have argued, the event in “mythical time” is
in some way positive, how are we to understand this example? In the case
of La Princesse, the event was a new understanding of sociality that can
44 Evan Edwards
be seen in the world and that proceeded from the relatively insignificant
publication of a short novel in the 17th century. In Swann’s love for Odette,
the amorous event is entirely self-reflexive, drawing on itself in order to
sustain Swann and Odette’s ridiculous affair. Nowhere are we told that
there is a single point, a declaration or otherwise, which is given retroactive
significance. In the case of La Princesse, we can refer back to the novel itself
and its popularity in the court in 17th century France as the transcendent
object to which we have retroactively assigned value. For Swann, his love
for Odette does not have the same sort of referent, relying entirely on the
“past that never was present.”
In this section, drawing on Chouraqui’s paper, I have established
the similarities between the theory of trauma that Zizek finds in the later
psychoanalytic theory of Freud with the thinking of the event that we dis-
covered in the later philosophy of Merleau-Ponty. I was then able to give a
more robust description of what constitutes the event in this later think-
ing, expanding on the definition given in the first section of this paper.
By looking at the case of Madame de La Fayette’s La Princesse de Clèves, I
was able to give a description of how this definition fits into an actual case
of a real event. Finally, in this section, I introduced what might be seen
as a snag in this definition of the event. In the next section, I will look at
Raphaël Gély’s article to understand how we might reconcile this problem
and draw on a contemporary thinker to help clarify our understanding
of the event.
Subject and Event
In Raphaël Gély’s article,“La Question de L’Événement dans la Phé-
noménologie de Merleau-Ponty,” he argues that the significance of the
event for Merleau-Ponty is the “institution of a cohesion of incompossi-
bles” (365). The event, according to Gély, is something that happens to sub-
jects that causes a crisis or rupture in their own bodily understanding of the
world. That is to say that in the wake of an event, a subject brings together
elements of the world that were previously seen as incommensurable. As I
said in the introduction to this paper, according to Gély, Merleau-Ponty’s
main concern with the event is how it becomes instituted and not how it
constitutes a subject. Gély here has as his target contemporary philosopher
Alain Badiou. For Badiou, following the Althusserian critique of phenom-
enological subjectivity, the subject comes to be constituted only in the wake
of an event.
Gély begins by arguing against Badiou’s theory of the event, saying
that Merleau-Ponty’s theory is superior because it “stops presupposing that
Trauma and EvEnT 45
the event is something which institutes or magically reveals a subject” (355).
Rather, he says, the event comes into the life of a subject unpredictably and
incalculably, and it is the subject that organizes this incompossible event
alongside that which is already given, instituting, as I said above, a “cohe-
sion of incompossibles.”
How does this mesh with my account of Merleau-Ponty’s theory of
the event so far? I have argued that for Merleau-Ponty, the event is the invis-
ible and open curvature of a significant moment that retroactively valuates
a given happening. If there is a subject involved with this event, I have not
established its place so far.
At the end of the previous section, I noted the difficulty of Swann
and Odette’s relationship in Swann’s Way. Whenever Swann finds a clue to
Odette’s infidelity and doubts his love for her, he is reminded of Vinteuil’s
little phrase and is once again emboldened to pursue their affair. We might
see this as a refutation of Gély’s understanding of Merleau-Ponty’s think-
ing of the relationship between event and subject. The institution of the
amorous event, Swann and Odette’s love, is what causes Swann to become
subject to the love. Then again, we may agree with Gély and argue that it
is Swann’s own subjectivity that institutes the amorous event. If this is the
case, then we might also find an explanation for the faulty continuation of
this event, which is doing nothing but harm to both Swann and Odette.
That is, if what is at stake is the cohesion of the incompossible elements
of Swann’s life and his love for Odette, we can easily understand that the
problems inherent in their relationship are grounded in Swann’s inability
to create a proper cohesion.
This brings us to a point of real decision. To accept the pre-existence of
the subject is to bring us to Gély’s position. To reject the pre-existence of the
subject and argue for the institution of a subject in the wake of the event is
to bring us to an entirely different position, one that is similar to Badiou’s.
The example that Gély himself uses to make his case, that of the famous two
hands touching, perhaps betrays his own argument. In the article, he writes
that “in the merleau-pontian experience of touching-touched, the subject
does not resolve the incompossibility . . . except in a process of incarna-
tion” (Gély 363). He believes that this shows that unless we are in bodily
situation, we cannot hope to achieve the process of creating a cohesive
world where the event is instituted alongside the rest of the world.
We may read this famous example of the touching-touched anoth-
er way, however. At the beginning of “The Intertwining—The Chiasm,”
Merleau-Ponty writes that philosophy must “recommence everything, reject
the instruments reflection and intuition [have] provided themselves, and
install itself in a locus where they have not yet been distinguished” (VI
130). The event of the touching-touched, similarly, forces us to consider
46 Evan Edwards
the reversibility of subject and object all “pell-mell” (VI 130). Gély’s argu-
ment relies on the assumption that there is a subject who experiences both
the touching and the touched, the alien feeling of being at once subject and
object. But how does this example work when considering the flesh of the
world generally? If the touching-touched example is supposed to describe
not only the subjective experience of one’s own body but also the condition
for any visibility and contact with the world whatsoever, then must we also
posit a subject whose flesh is the flesh of the world, a deity perhaps? Gély
seems to consider only the localized encounter of the flesh, wherein we
might be able to posit an already existing subject. The touching-touched
example, against Gély, seems to suggest the possibility of a subject that
realizes itself only in the wake of its understanding itself to possibly also
be an object.
What we do learn from Gély, however, is what I noted earlier about
the aftermath of the event as the cohesion of incompossibles. In this last
portion of this section, I noted that we are forced to decide between Gély’s
positioning of the subject in this definition and a position closer to Ba-
diou’s. Though I opted for the latter in light the insights from the touching-
touched example, it is still to be determined whether Gély is correct in
what he has to say about this cohesion. I have argued that the event func-
tions much like trauma. The event is the invisible real which retroactively
assigns value to some visible occurrence. But who is it that does the work of
this retroactive assignment? Furthermore, who evaluates the significance
of the invisible event? I argue that it is the subject who has come under the
effect of this event who must do this work. I noted in the second section of
this paper the possibility of a “psychoanalysis of the invisible” that would
allow us to analyze the curvature of the event. For Badiou, finding the
way that the event relates to the world through an exegesis of its depth is
precisely the process of inquiry that constitutes the finite instance of the
subject. Badiou relates the subject to the event through its invisibility and
the infinite unfolding of its openness to the world.
But while Badiou’s theory of the event almost thoroughly necessitates
a serial understanding of time, Merleau-Ponty, as we have seen, rejects this
position. For Badiou, the event is composed of two parts. First, the event
is a collection of mundane facts. In his most famous example, Badiou talks
about how, on one hand, we can talk about the French Revolution by refer-
ring to the storming of the Bastille, the marches on Versailles, the Terror,
and so on (180). On the other hand, the French Revolution also signified
an invisible cause that was incalculable. To say that the French Revolution
was caused by inequity between the social classes in France would be to re-
duce the significance of the event itself. However, unlike the understanding
of Merleau-Ponty’s thinking of the event that we have given in this paper,
Trauma and EvEnT 47
for Badiou, the event does in fact have an end. He argues that what can be
found in the event itself is contained in the words and actions of those who
were involved in it. This doesn’t mean that we can’t be contemporaries of a
certain event, but there is definitely a point where the event itself is done.
Rather than presuming to be a part of the event itself, we must be “faith-
ful” to the event. We must, in other words, remain committed to the truth
introduced by the event. The process of inquiring into the event is, for
Badiou, staying true to the event, not participating in the event itself.
Merleau-Ponty would have trouble accepting this, I believe. As we
noted above, this theory still relies on a serial understanding of time. Both
Badiou and Merleau-Ponty want to avoid the reduction of the event to the
result of a causal chain. Both want to retain the openness of the interpre-
tation of and fidelity to the event. In the field of Merleau-Ponty studies, I
believe that this understanding of the similarities between the two thinkers
could prompt continuing research into the meaning of the event and alter-
native understandings of subjectivity in his philosophy. In the field of Ba-
diou studies, I hope that this understanding will lead to a rethinking of the
understanding of time, possibly non-serially. Because of the criticisms that
have been leveled against Badiou about the “divine” nature of the event,
emerging ex nihilo in a time line, considering time in different, non-serial
ways might aid in explaining the relation of being, time, and event.
Conclusion
In this paper, I sought a theory of the event in the philosophy of
Merleau-Ponty. By examining his theory of time in his last works and by
looking to the work of Mauro Carbone, I came to a preliminary theory of
the event which relied on a “mythical time.” In the second section, I argued
for the similarity between this philosophy of the event and Freud’s later
theory of trauma. Finally, by evaluating Raphaël Gély’s argument about the
fundamental difference between the event in Merleau-Ponty and Badiou, I
chose to reject his thesis but use what he had to say to make my own con-
nection between the two thinkers. In the end, I hope that this paper has
suggested new directions for thinking the connections and disagreements
between Merleau-Ponty and Badiou, a field that has been uncharted
thus far.
Works Cited
Badiou, Alain and Oliver Feltham. Being and Event. New York: Continuum,
2007.
Carbone, Mauro. The Thinking of the Sensible: Merleau-Ponty’s A-Philosophy.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern UP, 2004.
Chouraqui, Frank. “Thickness and the Vertical Unfolding of Time in
the Notes of May 1959.” 35th Annual Meeting of the International
Merleau-Ponty Circle. University of North Carolina–Asheville. 23
Sep. 2010. Lecture.
Davis, Duane, ed. Merleau-Ponty’s Later Works and Their Practical
Implications: The Dehiscence of Responsibility. Amherst, NY: Humanity
Books, 2001.
Deleuze, Gilles. Difference and Repetition. Trans. Paul Patton. New York:
Continuum, 2004.
Gély, Raphaël. “La Question de l’Événement dans la Phénoménologie
de Merleau-Ponty.” Laval Theologique et Philosophique 56.2 (2000):
353–65.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception. New York: Routledge
Classics, 1962.
————. The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston, IL: Northwestern UP, 1968.
Zizek, Slavoj. “Troubles with the Real: Lacan as a Viewer of Aliens.”
Lacanian Ink. N.p., 2007. Web. 7 Dec. 2010.
Works Consulted
Dastur, Françoise. “Phenomenology of the Event: Waiting and Surprise.”
Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy 15.4 (2000): 178–89.
Freud, Sigmund. The Ego and the Id. New York: Norton, 1989.
Stewart, Jon. The Debate Between Sarte and Merleau-Ponty. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern UP, 1998.