Aporia vol. 18 no. 1—2008
Charles Hartshorne and the Ontological Argument
Joshua Ernst
T he ontological argument distinguishes itself from the cosmological
and teleological arguments for God’s existence because it is a priori,
while the cosmological and teleological arguments are a posteriori.
One of the first to formulate the ontological argument was St. Anselm, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who lived in the late eleventh century. Anselm’s
argument rests on the idea that God, by definition, is “that than which
none greater can be conceived” and that this definition, when used in a
proof created by Anselm, proves God’s existence. Another key point in
Anselm’s argument is that if God exists, he must exist necessarily, symbolized
“p ⊃ Np.” According to Anselm, who represents a classical understanding
of God, it is impossible for God to exist contingently.
Anselm’s argument has been criticized and critiqued by many philoso-
phers, one of whom was Immanuel Kant. Kant felt that an ontological proof
of the existence of God was impossible (Pojman 5). He called into ques-
tion the use of being or existence as a predicate, which is used throughout
the ontological argument. Kant argued that existence is not a great making
property—knowing that something exists does not enhance the thing itself
(Pojman 7). A century later, Charles Hartshorne revised the ontological
argument and presented a different interpretation of God’s mode of exis-
tence or of the way God can and needs to be perfect. Hartshorne argued
that not only does his version of the argument withstand critiques such as
Kant’s, it eliminates the fallacy he feels Anselm’s original argument creates:
rather than prove God’s existence, Anselm’s argument proves the necessity
of God’s non-existence. I will first outline Anselm’s original argument and
Kant’s critique of that argument. I will then outline Hartshorne’s version of
Joshua Ernst is a senior at Brigham Young University studying philosophy, logic,
and Spanish. His primary interest is philosophy of religion. After graduation he
plans to attend law school where he will study business litigation. This essay won
third place in the 2008 David H. Yarn Essay Contest.
58 Joshua ernst
the argument and explain in detail the following: the central assumption of
Hartshorne’s proof, that God is possible, Hartshorne’s defense of that the-
sis, and that Hartshorne’s defense establishes the validity of his thesis.
St. Anselm’s Presentation
Anselm defines God as that than which none greater can be conceived.
He claims that when someone hears this, “he surely understands what he
hears; and what he understands exists in his understanding” (Pojman 4).
However, even though this idea exists in the understanding of an individ-
ual, that individual may not necessarily realize that it exists in reality as well.
These two things are obviously different, for as Anselm explained, “When
a painter, for example, thinks out in advance what he is going to paint, he
has it in his understanding, but he does not yet understand that it exists,
since he has not yet painted it” (Pojman 4). However, once the artist paints
the object, then it exists both in his understanding, and he understands
that it exists. Anselm continues his argument by claiming that than which
none greater can be conceived cannot only exist in the understanding, “for
if it exists only in the understanding, it can be thought to exist in reality as
well, which is greater” (Pojman 4). This leads to a contradiction, as shown
in the following proof:
1. God = that than which none greater can be con-
df
ceived.
2. Some things exist only in the understanding; oth-
ers exist both in the understanding and in reality.
3. God exists in the understanding.
4. All else being equal, that which exists both in
the understanding and in reality is greater than that
which exists only in the understanding.
5. God exists only in the understanding.
6. It is possible to conceive a God that does not exist
only in the understanding.
7. We can conceive of a greater being than God.
(4) (5) (6)
8. We can conceive of a greater being than God
and God is that than which none greater can be
conceived. (1) (7)
9. God does not exist only in the understanding.
(5) (8)
10. Therefore, he must exist in reality as well.
Charles hartshorne and the ontologiCal argument 59
In addition to the conclusion that God exists, according to Anselm it
is important to understand how he exists. Anselm believed that if God exists,
he must exist necessarily, “so that the statement he exists is necessarily true”
(Goodwin 3). God’s existence is either necessary or is impossible, or “the
statement that God exists is either necessarily true or necessarily false” (4).
This argument can be symbolized as follows (4):
“N” for “necessary that”
“q” for “a perfect being exists”
1. Nq ∨ N q Anselm’s Principle
~
2. N q Assumption
~ ~
3. Nq Inference from 1,2
4. Nq ⊃ q Modal Axiom
5. q Inference from 3,4
This argument is central to Hartshorne’s revision of the argument, which I
will discuss later in greater detail.
Immanuel Kant’s Objections
According to Kant, the greatest weakness of the ontological argument
is its use of existence as a predicate. A judgment has the simple form S is P,
S being the subject and P being the predicate. A predicate, Kant argues, is
something that enlarges our understanding of the subject. For example, the
statement, “every triangle has three angles” is a statement which enlarges
our understanding of the thing that is a triangle. However, Kant argues that
this understanding came from “judgments and not from things. But the
unconditioned necessity of a judgment does not form the absolute neces-
sity of a thing” (Pojman 6–7). The example of the triangle does not tell
us that three angles actually exist, but that “upon condition that a triangle
exists, three angles must necessarily exist—in it” (Pojman 7). In judgments, if
we were to remove the predicate, then the subject remaining by itself would
cause a contradiction to occur. It is impossible to think about a triangle
that does not have three angles—the exclusion of this predicate makes it
self-contradictory. However, to “suppose the non-existence of both triangle
and angles” (Pojman 7), would be acceptable because doing so does not
yield a self-contradiction. Consider the statements “God exists” and “God
is omnipotent.” To deny the omnipotence of God, while assuming his
existence, would be contradictory, for God, by definition, is omnipotent.
60 Joshua ernst
“But when you say, God does not exist, neither omnipotence nor any other
predicate is affirmed; they must all disappear with the subject, and in this
judgment there cannot exist the least self-contradiction” (Pojman 7).
Consider the following two statements: “cats scratch” and “cats exist.”
The former can be interpreted two ways: “if there were cats, they would
scratch” and “there are cats and they scratch.” Following this model, the
second statement can also be interpreted two ways: “if there were any cats,
they would exist” and “there are cats and they exist.” The fallacy is clear:
“Being is evidently not a real predicate, that is, a conception of something
which is added to the conception of some other thing” (Pojman 8). To say
that there is something does not create a new predicate; it merely affirms
the subject with all of its already existing predicates. Kant’s objection to the
argument contradicts premise four of the argument given earlier: “All else
being equal, that which exists both in the understanding and in reality is
greater than that which exists only in the understanding.” Following the
interpretation of Anselm and the way his argument is presented, Kant’s
objections adequately show its invalidity. Therefore, what is needed is a
revision of the original argument: a revision that can withstand Kant’s cri-
tique of predicated existence.
Hartshorne’s Revision
The formalized version of Hartshorne’s proof, which he presented in
The Logic of Perfection, is as follows:
“q” for “(∃x)Px,” “there is a perfect being, or perfection exists”
“N” for “it is necessary (logically true) that”
1. q ⊃ Nq “Anselm’s Principle”1
2. Nq ∨ Nq Excluded Middle
~
3. Nq ⊃ N Nq Form of Becker’s Postulate2
~ ~
4. Nq ∨ N Nq Inference from (2,3)
~
5. N Nq ⊃ N q Inference from (1)
~ ~
6. Nq ∨ N q Inference (4,5)
~
7. N q Intuitive postulate3
~ ~
8. Nq Inference from (6,7)
9. Nq ⊃ q Modal Axiom
10. q Inference from (8,9)
1 Perfection cannot exist contingently.
2 Modal status is always necessary.
3 Perfection is possible.
Charles hartshorne and the ontologiCal argument 61
The central assumption or thesis to Hartshorne’s argument is that
God’s existence is possible. This assumption is important because the logi-
cal underpinning of the argument is that to be possible and to be are the
same thing. In defense of his thesis, Hartshorne offers two main points:
the inclusion of possibility in the reality of God and that the neoclassical
conception of God is able to overcome major difficulties the classical concep-
tion, such as that of Anselm, is not able to overcome. In order to see the
importance of possibility, first we must understand the differences between
classical and neoclassical conceptions. Hartshorne did not disagree with
every aspect of Anselm’s insights: his “argument against Anselm is that,
while his insight into the logical status of perfection was correct (i.e., that
perfection is either absolutely necessary or utterly impossible), his interpre-
tation of what perfection means was inadequate” (Goodwin 52–53). The
classical conception of God dictated the following: perfection must imply
changelessness, a perfect being must be wholly actual, there is no potential-
ity in the reality of God, and God is immutable or wholly necessary; there
is no distinction between what he is and that he is (53). Hartshorne labeled
this as actus purus.
Neoclassicism states that perfection does not need to imply change-
lessness. By introducing possibility into the reality of God, actus purus
becomes modal coextensiveness, or “God covers, with complete adequacy and
comprehensiveness the territory of the actual and the territory of the pos-
sible” (Goodwin 55). This means that God is both everything that is and
everything that could be. Modal coextensieveness also implies a certain
distinction in an individual between its abstract identity, the idea of some-
thing, and its concrete actual states, how that thing actually is. For example,
there is a distinction between the fact that you exist, which encompasses you
as an idea or being, and the fact you exist now reading this paper, or how
it is that you exist in this moment. God has these two distinctions as well;
however, the difference between you and God is that “in Him alone it is
possible to treat existence as not only different, but different modally, from
actuality, i.e., so that one is necessary, the other contingent” (Goodwin 56).
God can be necessary (his abstract being) and contingent (his concrete states
of existence). Under this revision, all the normally attributed properties of
God do not apply to his whole being, but only to one aspect; they apply
to his abstract being, not to his contingent and changing states and there-
fore, the classical definitions of God are not denied. I will now show that the
neoclassical conception of God is able to overcome the major difficulties
that the classical conception is unable to overcome. I will follow a defense
for this thesis outlined by George L. Goodwin in his work The Ontological
Argument of Charles Hartshorne.4
4 I have already cited Goodwin various times in the paper, but the information I have cited is not unique
to his book alone. However, the defense he outlines is specific enough for me to explicitly cite his book.
62 Joshua ernst
A Formal Ambiguity in the Notion of Perfection
Anselm said God is, by definition, that than which none greater can
be conceived or that there is no greater being than God. However, this
can be interpreted in two ways. Either God is unsurpassable by all beings,
or he is unsurpassable by all beings “save self in future states” (Goodwin
58). If interpreted one way, then the “none” in Anselm’s definition refers
to all beings, including God himself, and if interpreted the other, then the
“none” refers to other beings, except for God himself in the future. This
ambiguity allows for a “neglected alternative” in the realm of perfection
(58). Goodwin argues that “God is absolutely perfect in all respects” and
“God is absolutely perfect in no respects” are contradictory, that only one
can be true, but that they can both be false at the same time. Therefore, all
the possibilities must be taken into account. The alternative lies between
“all” and “none,” or “some.” Goodwin formalized the three possibilities
as follows: “God is in all respects absolutely perfect and is unsurpassable
by self; God is in some respects absolutely perfect and unsurpassable, and in
other respects perfectible or surpassable by self; God is in no respects absolutely
perfect and in all respects perfectible” (Goodwin 59).
Perfection Requires Potentiality
There is an important distinction between the neoclassical concept,
modal coextensiveness, and the classical concept, actus purus. The former
expresses perfection in terms of becoming, while the latter expresses perfec-
tion in terms of being. Under the idea of perfection in terms of becoming,
there exist two modes of reality: “concrete becoming and abstract being”
(Goodwin 60). In terms of abstract being, perfection will be achieved; it
will have the static notion that classic theism believes. However, in terms of
concrete becoming, the being will be maximally perfectible only by him.
Actus purus, argues Goodwin, removes the distinction between pos-
sibility and actuality. Because God possesses all values completely, what
actually is and what could be are the same thing. However, Goodwin offers
the following example: If the definition of omniscience is “perfect knowl-
edge,” and a correct knowledge of events which have not yet occurred
requires temporality in understanding, “then a perfect knower will know
the future . . . as possible and not as actual. God’s knowledge is perfect
because he knows all the actuality as actual and all the possibility as pos-
sible” (Goodwin 62). This understanding is requisite as we consider the
idea of all possible values. There are values, such as green and not-green,
that are such that they cannot exist at the same time. A classical concept
of God requires the actuality of all values, or that all possibilities are actual
Charles hartshorne and the ontologiCal argument 63
and complete. However, even a simple contradiction between green and
not-green shows that this cannot be. Under the classical interpretation,
such a contradiction would render the argument not only invalid, it would
be necessarily impossible for God to exist under the classic interpretation
while considering the notion of perfection. However, in a neoclassical
interpretation God has all actual values as actual and all possible values as
possible, thus allowing Hartshorne’s argument to avoid the contradiction.
Goodwin raises another contradiction within the classical under-
standing and the idea of infinity and actuality. Goodwin defines actuality
as “the decision among competitive alternative possibilities” (63) or that
there is always a choice among possibilities in any situation, and there are
more possibilities that are not brought about than those that are. If actus
purus contains the possibilities that are carried out, what of the possibilities
that are not carried out? By definition, infinity would take into con-
sideration both those possibilities that are carried out and those that are
not carried out. However, it is important to remember that infinite, in
terms of actus purus, cannot mean all possibilities, for I have already shown
above that all possibilities are not housed within actus purus (green and
not-green). It would seem, according to Goodwin, that infinity is not the
totality of actuality, but “the unrestricted disjunction of all possible states
of affairs” (63). In the modal coextensiveness of God, infinity is contained
within his potentiality, not within his actuality.
The final contradiction stems from a critique much like that of
Kant. Goodwin argues that “nor can the divine reality—conceived as
wholly actual—be necessary. No actuality . . . can be necessary, and this is
the insight which has been misstated in the dogma that ‘existence is not a
predicate.’ . . . God as actual cannot be necessary” (64). Classic interpreta-
tion, just as Kant argued, cannot carry existence as a predicate because it
simply states that God exists. However, modal coextensiveness’s existence
is always a predicate, because modal coextensiveness says that God is con-
tingent or necessary, which describes how he exists, rather than stating that
he does. Describing how something exists adds to the thing itself, and thus
Hartshorne’s argument is able to avoid another objection that the classical
interpretation cannot.
The Existence-Actuality Distinction
Hartshorne once said, speaking of the existence-actuality distinc-
tion, that it “is so essential I would have little interest in the ontological
proof apart from it” (Goodwin 65). It is vital to Hartshorne because it is
the backbone of his potentiality argument—that God’s actual state is not the
greatest possible state. To approach this subject, Goodwin first considers
64 Joshua ernst
the distinction between concrete and abstract. Both actus purus and modal
coextensiveness share one feature: both are conceptions of perfection that
are a priori (65). Goodwin asks, “how can a property that is a priori, perfec-
tion, be distinguished from and yet logically entail an existent being having
the property? . . . What is the bridge from the abstract concept of perfection
to the concrete actuality of a perfect being?” (66). The idea of humanity,
while we understand what is meant, does not necessarily mean that there
are humans. Goodwin argues that the classical concept fails to answer this
question, while the neoclassical concept is able to give an answer. The dis-
tinction between existence and actuality is a distinction between what is
perfect and what has the property of perfection. In his abstract existence,
“God is his perfection . . . but God, in his concrete status, embodies perfec-
tion” or God has the property of perfection and is therefore not identical
with perfection (66). Here, what connects the abstract with the concrete (like
the bridge above) is the idea that the abstract perfection and concrete
instances of perfection must be part of the same individual. God contains
both abstract perfection and concrete instances of that perfection. Goodwin
argues that the ontological proof does not prove that there is a necessary
instance of perfection (as Anselm’s argument purports), but rather that the
group of possible instances of perfection must have something in it, and
that everything in that group must belong to one individual.
Goodwin notes another flaw in actus purus and dimensions of value.
Under the classical concept, God is without any increase; he possesses the
maximum of all values. However, there are some values that do not have a
limit. Take for example knowledge. When compared to “the richness and
variety . . . of its objects, (knowledge) can have no maximal form” (71). Why
is this? Because the nature of having a richness of knowledge is that there
will always be something new to experience, “new actualities for a perfect
knower to know” (Goodwin 71). However, knowledge, understood as an
error-free state of knowing, can have a maximum limit. The distinction is
between concrete values, a knowledge of x, and an abstract value, or hav-
ing all knowledge. Rather than God’s perfection being the realization of
maximum values, the question is posed, “must we not proceed more cau-
tiously and define ‘perfection’ rather as the categorically ultimate form of
all attributes that admit such form and the categorically superior form of all
attributes that do not admit an ultimate form?” (Goodwin 72).
Conclusion
The idea of proving the existence of God a priori has appealed to phil-
osophical theologians for centuries. In his presentation of the ontological
Charles hartshorne and the ontologiCal argument 65
argument, Anselm felt that he had achieved that very goal. However, impor-
tant objections raised by later philosophers, such as Kant, clearly showed
the invalidity of the argument as Anselm had presented it. However, in his
revision of the argument, Hartshorne strengthened the argument not only
from critiques like those of Kant (namely that existence is not a predicate),
but also from the fallacies that occurred within the original argument itself.
Hartshorne’s modal coextensiveness, which contained abstract and con-
crete perfection, solved the problems faced by Anselm’s original argument,
such as those of perfection and infinity. Lastly, the distinction between
concrete and abstract proved Hartshorne’s original thesis: to be possible
and to be are indeed the same thing.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Goodwin, George L. The Ontological Argument of Charles Hartshorne. Missoula,
MT: Scholars Press, 1978.
Pojman, Louis P. and Michael Rea. Philosophy of Religion: An Anthology. New
York: Cambridge UP, 2008.