Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
Hempel’s Raven
Joshua Ernst
In his paper “Studies of Logical Confirmation,” Carl Hempel discusses
his criteria for an adequate theory of confirmation. In his discussion,
he argues that Jean Nicod’s criterion of confirmation fails to give an
adequate theory because it generates a logical paradox, sometimes referred
to as Hempel’s Raven. Although some have argued that the paradox is moot
for various reasons, Hempel argues that the solution given to the paradox is
important. In this paper I will present Hempel’s argument against Nicod,
and the paradox that results under what Hempel calls “The Equivalence
Condition.” I will then give Hempel’s own argument regarding the paradox
and his proposed solution. Lastly, I will show an argument by I. J. Good
that argues against the paradox and explain why Hempel’s solution to the
paradox has greater meaning for us.
Hempel first quotes from Nicod’s “Foundation of Geometry and
Induction:”
Consider the formula or the law: A entails B. How
can a particular proposition, or more briefly, a fact,
affect its probability? If this fact consists of the pres-
ence of B in a case of A, it is favorable to the law
“A entails B”; on the contrary, if it consists of the
absence of B in a case of A, it is unfavorable to
this law . . . . Thus, the entire influence of particu-
lar truths or facts on the probability of universal
propositions or laws would operate by means of
Joshua Ernst is a senior majoring in philosophy with minors in logic and Spanish.
His interests include philosophy of language, logic, and philosophy of religion. In the
fall of 2009 he will be attending law school at Arizona State University. This essay
took first place in the 2009 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
2 Joshua Ernst
these two elementary relations which we shall call
confirmation and invalidation. (Hempel 9)
Nicod’s hypothesis results in a universal hypothesis of the following form:
(x)(Ax ⊃ Bx)
Hempel argues, “In other words, an object confirms a universal condi-
tional hypothesis if and only if it satisfies both the antecedent . . . and the
consequent . . . of the conditional” (10). If I have an object that satisfies
the antecedent, or is an instance of property A, say Ah, and that same
object satisfies the consequent, or has property B such that Bh, then
that object confirms the universal conditional hypothesis. An object
then disconfirms the universal conditional hypothesis if it has both prop-
erty A and not property B (Ah and ~Bh).
Hempel then examines the shortcomings of Nicod’s theory, and sub-
sequently establishes the paradox. Hempel gives two sentences, “All ravens
are black” and “All non-black things are not ravens,” as follows:
S : (x)(Raven(x) ⊃ Black(x))
1
S : (x)(~Black(x) ⊃ ~Raven(x))
2
To generate the problem, Hempel describes four different objects, a, b, c,
and d, as follows: a is a raven and is black, b is a raven but is not black,
c is not a raven but is black, and d is neither a raven nor black. “Then . . .
a would confirm S , but be neutral with respect to S ; b would disconfirm
1 2
both S and S ; c would be neutral with respect to both S and S , and d
1 2 1 2
would confirm S , but be neutral with respect to S ” (Hempel 11).1 If we
2 1
consider S and S , the sentences say the same thing, they are merely written
1 2
in a different way. And yet a and d, which satisfy S and S respectively, do
1 2
not satisfy the other sentence. Thus, “Nicod’s criterion makes confirma-
tion depend not only on the content of the hypothesis, but also on its
formulation” (Hempel 11). Hempel then arrives at a pivotal conclusion:
Every hypothesis to which the criterion is applica-
ble, i.e. every universal conditional, can be stated
in a form for which there cannot possibly exist any
confirming instances. Thus, the sentence
(x)[(Raven(x) ⋅ ~Black(x)) ⊃ (Raven(x) ⋅ ~Raven(x))]
1 For the purposes of this paper, I will not consider Hempel’s concept of neutrality in a theory of
confirmation.
hEmpEl’s ravEn 3
is readily recognized as equivalent to both S and
1
S above; yet no object whatever can confirm this
2
sentence. (Hempel 11)
From the conclusions reached above, Hempel can generate the
paradox. He describes “a condition which an adequately defined concept
of confirmation should satisfy . . . : [the] Equivalence condition: Whatever
confirms (disconfirms) one of two equivalent sentences, also confirms
(disconfirms) the other” (Hempel 12). Armed with the Equivalence condi-
tion (to be referred to as EC), Hempel shows the paradox that follows. Take
our two sentences, S and S . Everyone can agree, Hempel argues, that if
1 2
a is “both a raven and black, then a certainly confirms S ” (Hempel 14),
1
and likewise, if d is neither black nor a raven, then it certainly confirms S .
2
Using the EC, then, because S and S are equivalent, d is also confirm-
1 2
ing S . Thus any object which is not black and not a raven confirms our
1
universal conditional hypothesis that all ravens are black. “Consequently,
any red pencil, any green leaf, and yellow cow, etc., becomes confirming
evidence for the hypothesis that all ravens are black” (Hempel 14). Hempel
further defends this position:
The following sentence can readily be shown to be
equivalent to S : S : ‘(x)[(Raven(x) ∨ ~Raven(x)) ⊃
1 3
(~Raven(x) ∨ Black(x))]’, i.e. “Anything which is or
is not a raven is either no raven or black.” According
to the above sufficient condition, S is certainly
3
confirmed by any object, say e, such that (1) e is or
is not a raven and, in addition, (2) e is not a raven
or also black. Since (1) is analytic, these conditions
reduce to (2). By virtue of the equivalence condi-
tion, we have therefore to consider as confirming
for S any object which is either no raven or also
1
black (in other words: any object which is no raven
at all, or a black raven). (Hempel 14)
Hempel wonders if the customary mode of presenting
sentences of universal conditional form . . . has to be
modified; and perhaps such a modification would
automatically remove the paradoxes of confirma-
tion[.] If this is not so, there seems to be only one
alternative left, namely to show that the impression
of the paradoxical character of those consequences
is due to misunderstanding and can be dispelled, so
that no theoretical difficulty remains. (Hempel 15)
4 Joshua Ernst
I will focus on the second of these two possibilities, “the possibility of
tracing the impression of paradoxicality back to a misunderstanding”
(Hempel 15).
In defense of the second of the two possibilities, Hempel argues that the
conclusion is actually a psychological illusion rather than something that
is objectively founded. He gives two arguments in support of this theory.
The first comes in how we understand a universal conditional hypothesis,
like (x)(Px ⊃ Qx). In saying that every P is Q, we think that we are limiting
our focus to the objects that have the property P. Hempel says, “This idea
involves a confusion of logical and practical considerations” (Hempel 18).
While we may have only written about the property P in our sentence,
that universal conditional hypothesis asserts something about, “and indeed
imposes restrictions upon,” all objects (Hempel 18). The statement “every
P is Q” does not allow an occurrence of an object with predicate P to
occur unless it is also has property Q: “Every object either belongs to this
class or falls outside it, and thus, every object—and not only the P’s—either
conforms to the hypothesis or violates it; there is no object which is not
implicitly ‘referred to’ by a hypothesis of this type” (Hempel 18–19).
Hempel gives the second argument for his hypothesis in the follow-
ing example:
Suppose we have a universal conditional hypoth-
esis which states “All sodium salts burn yellow.”
Someone comes with a piece of ice and holds it in a
colorless flame. As is expected, the flame would not
turn yellow, and this would support the hypothesis
that “Whatever does not burn yellow is not sodium
salt.” Suppose another person comes with an object
whose “chemical constitution is as yet unknown to
us” and when held under the flame “fails to turn it
yellow, and where subsequent analysis reveals it to
contain no sodium salt.” (Hempel 20)
We would say that this experiment also confirms our hypothesis that all
sodium salts burn yellow and that the two experiments confirm the same
thing, “no matter in which of its various equivalent formulations it may
be expressed; thus, the data here obtained constitute confirming evidence
for the hypothesis” (Hempel 19). The paradox comes when we consider a
fundamental difference between the two experiments. In the first test, we
knew that the object being held in the flame was ice, and because we had a
previous knowledge that ice does not contain sodium salt, “the outcome of
the flame-color test becomes entirely irrelevant for the confirmation of the
hypothesis and thus can yield no new evidence for us” (Hempel 19).
hEmpEl’s ravEn 5
Hempel argues that when a paradoxical situation arises, like the one
demonstrated with the raven, we are not merely judging the relation of an
object that is evidence of a claim to the claim itself. Instead,
we tacitly introduce a comparison of [the hypoth-
esis] with a body of evidence which consists of [the
object] in conjunction with an additional amount
of information which we happen to have at our dis-
posal; in our illustration, this information includes
the knowledge (1) that the substance used in the
experiment is ice, and (2) that ice contains no
sodium salt. If we assume this additional informa-
tion as given, then, of course, the outcome of the
experiment can add no strength to the hypothesis
under consideration. (Hempel 19–20)
In order to avoid this “tacit reference to additional knowledge,” we need to
ask an important question: If I am presented with some object a, (assum-
ing a to be a piece of ice and assuming this information is withheld from
me), and when I hold a in a colorless flame which does not change while
burning a, and thus a does not contain sodium salt, “does a then constitute
confirming evidence for the hypothesis?” (Hempel 20). It is only when we
do this that finding confirming evidence in support of a universal condi-
tional hypothesis can occur, and the paradox vanishes.
Let us take our evidence and consider once again the raven’s para-
dox. As stated above, the paradox arose when we were able to use an object
which satisfies S , namely that all non-black things are not ravens, as evi-
2
dence in support of the fact that all ravens are black. Suppose we consider
the white computer that I am using to write this paper. This constitutes an
object that is not black and not a raven. Thus my computer lends support
to the fact that all ravens are black. However, suppose that an alien comes
from another galaxy. This being has no idea what it means to be a raven,
and in his world, in some unfathomable way to us, there is no experience
of color. I tell him that I have a universal conditional hypothesis that I want
him to confirm, namely that all ravens are black. The alien is able to look
into my mind and extract a colorless representation of a raven. I then hold
up a piece of black paper in order to allow him to understand the color
black. Once he understands the hypothesis, I then show him my white
computer. He can clearly see that the object does not match the mental rep-
resentation he has of a raven, nor does the color of my computer match the
color of the piece of paper I have shown him. He takes this as evidence that
all non-black things are not ravens, and only in an instance like this, where
we have no previous knowledge associated with the objects in question,
6 Joshua Ernst
will our results constitute confirming evidence, and as Hempel argued, the
paradox vanishes.
In his article “The White Shoe Is a Red Herring,” I. J. Good makes
an argument against the raven’s paradox by arguing that Nicod’s criterion is
false. Good gives an example in which finding a black raven would decrease
the probability that all ravens are black. He argues that
in the present note we show in six sentences, and even
without reference to the contrapositive, that a case of
a hypothesis does not necessarily support it.
Suppose that we know we are in one or other of two
worlds, and the hypothesis, H, under consideration
is that all the crows in our world are black. We know
in advance that in one world there are a hundred
black crows, no crows that are not black, and a mil-
lion other birds; and that in the other world there
are a thousand black crows, one white one, and a
million other birds. A bird is selected equiprobably
at random from all the birds in our world. It turns
out to be a black crow. This is strong evidence . . .
that we are in the second world, wherein not all
crows are black. Thus the observation of a black
crow, in the circumstances described, undermines
the hypothesis that all the crows in our world are
black. Thus the initial premise of the paradox of
confirmation is false, and no reference to the con-
trapositive is required. (Good 322)
Because finding an object that would normally support the universal con-
ditional hypothesis in fact decreases the likelihood of that statement being
true, then for a white shoe to give evidence to the fact that all ravens are
black is not as important as Hempel believes it to be. However, if we con-
sider Hempel’s argument which I have just illustrated, I believe that Good’s
reason to ignore the paradox does not hold as strongly as he believes.
Good presents a situation which decreases the importance of an
object giving support to a completely unrelated hypothesis by showing it
is possible to have an object which confirms the hypothesis and actually
decrease the probability of the hypothesis being true. However, I argue that
Hempel’s argument regarding the paradox has a greater bearing on our
everyday life. Because we store information in a categorized way, barring
some type of mental defect, the associations we make in our daily obser-
vations will stay with us. However, it is that very idea—that we make and
hEmpEl’s ravEn 7
keep sensory observations and that there are certain associations among
the observations (all ravens are black)—that causes paradoxical situations to
appear. The result is a contradiction between our senses and our reason.
The contradiction between reason and senses is not new. Zeno is
credited with famous, ancient paradoxes which illustrate this very idea.
Suppose we look at an arrow in flight. When we talk about its motion, we
can either say that it moves in the space it is in or that it moves in the space
in which it is not. The arrow cannot move in the space that it is in, for it
occupies all of the space that is possible for the arrow to occupy. It also can-
not move in a space in which it is not, for how can something move in a
space which it does not occupy? Thus the arrow cannot actually move, and
yet, our senses tell us that the arrow is moving. Oftentimes we are more
inclined to trust our senses than our reason, so many would see the above
paradox as merely twisting words. However, in the example of Hempel’s
raven, we are not twisting words nor committing any hidden fallacies, and
yet the paradox arises. Hempel’s explanation of the psychological illusion
best answers the paradox, because it gives us a tool to begin to resolve the
contradictions we see between reason and the senses. If we can disassociate
ourselves from our observations, thus allowing reason and logic to properly
function, then the paradoxes that we seem to observe will disappear.
Works Cited
Good, I. J. “The White Shoe is a Red Herring.” The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 17 (1967): 322.
Hempel, Carl G. “Studies in the Logic of Confirmation (I.).” Mind 54.213
(1945): 1–26.