Aporiavol. 16 no. 1—2006
How Queer?
RUSSELLFARR
I
n his book Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, J. L. Mackie agues against
the existence of objective moral values. He does so in two sections, the
first called “the argument from relativity” and the second “the argu-
ment from queerness” (Mackie, Ethics:Inventing Right and Wrong 36, 38).1
In this paper, I will examine each argument in turn and show that Mackie
fails in his attempts. Of course, by showing that Mackie’s arguments fail, I
have not shown that objective values exist, but that is not the purpose of
this paper. I only wish to expose some problems in Mackie’s arguments.
That is, in this paper, I plan to show that the arguments from relativity and
queerness are not convincing. In doing so, I will take some time to formu-
late them in the strongest way that I can, for I wish to avoid a straw man.
Again, I am not making an appeal to ignorance; I realize that there may be
other arguments better than Mackie’s and that I am far from establishing
the existence of objective moral values. I am showing, though, that
Mackie’s efforts fail.
The first argument that Mackie makes is from relativity. The argu-
ment from relativity has two parts, which I will call “A” and “B.” Part A
takes as evidence that there are variations in moral codes between different
periods of time, different groups, and even disagreement within groups
(Mackie 36). The argument claims that if there were objective moral values,
1 This book will be cited simply by the author’s last name followed by the page number on
which the cited material occurs.
Russell Farr is a junior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University. Upon
graduation he plans to attend law school. This essay won second place in the 2006
David H. Yarn Essay Contest.
12 RUSSELLFARR
there would be some consensus on morality because moral systems would
be based on those values. But there is widespread disagreement about
morality, and this is inconsistent with the hypothesis. Therefore, we must
admit that there are no objective moral values. More succinctly, the argu-
ment is as follows:
(1) If there were objective moral values, then there would be
uniformity in moral codes.
(2) Moral codes differ in important ways.
(3) Therefore, there are no objective moral values.
One may object to this argument by showing there is disagreement
in scientific questions, and thus one could analogously say:
(4) If there were objective facts, then scientists would agree
about them.
(5) Scientists disagree about many things.
(6) Therefore, there are no objective facts.
But unless we want to adhere to extreme subjectivism, which is not a doc-
trine that Mackie is espousing (see Brink, “Moral Realism and the Skeptical
Arguments from Disagreement and Queerness” 112), we must admit that
(7) Science is discovering objective facts.
So how is it that we can disagree about scientific questions and not end up
with this contradiction? It is because scientific disagreements are the result
of hypotheses that are based on inadequate evidence (Mackie 36). Our
incomplete knowledge causes these disputes, and because we do not have
a complete understanding of the natural world, we cannot assume that we
would agree upon all objective facts. It seems then that Mackie rejects (4)
and avoids the contradiction by claiming that the existence of objective facts
HOWQUEER? 13
does not necessitate our knowledge of them. But Mackie says “it is hardly
plausible to interpret moral disagreement in the same way” (Mackie 36).
In part B, Mackie makes an argument to best explanation and pro-
poses a theory of how morality actually works. He claims that our morality
is a result of our habits and customs (Mackie 36). For example, we prefer
monogamy because it is the type of thing we do, not because monogamy is
an objective good. We idealize the things that we do and call them objective
values. This theory better explains the variety in moral codes (Mackie 37). If
people in different cultures have different moral values than we do, it is
because they have idealized their behavior, some of which is different than
our own. This theory can adequately explain the wide variety in moral codes,
a variety that causes problems for theories positing objective moral values.2
The question, though, is whether or not Mackie’s arguments are actu-
ally convincing. If he is trying to demonstrate that there are no objective
moral values, he has a difficult task. There are very few ways of proving that
something does not exist. Either we would have to discover some true condi-
tional by which we can use modus ponensto arrive at the non-existence of the
thing or we would need to resort to a reductio ad absurdum. Mackie seems to
propose the conditional “if there are objective moral values, there would be
a consensus” and infers there are no objective moral values by modus tollens.
It seems Mackie has made a fatal assumption here. He has assumed
that the existence of objective moral values would force a consensus. I fail
to see why that would be so. What is it about objective moral values that
would force their knowledge upon us? There are many objective truths
that are yet unknown or are disputed by us. For a long time scientists have
debated the makeup of the atom. It cannot be both Thompson’s plum
pudding and an electron orbiting a nucleus.3 Yet whatever is really the
makeup of the atom, various possibilities have been disputed. Objective
facts have yet to force their knowledge upon us in any other circumstances,
so why should morality be different?
Mackie does try to refute objections that compare moral disagree-
ment to scientific disagreement, saying that “it is hardly plausible to
2Mackie treats a theory by Sidgwick that proposes to overcome the difficulty while maintaining
objective values (Mackie 37), but this is not relevant to my discussion.
3The current model is an electron probability cloud surrounding a nucleus.
14 RUSSELLFARR
interpret moral disagreement in the same way” (Mackie 36). But he gives
no other reason to believe this than his assertion. Scientific pursuits can
avoid this problem because the disputes are based on inadequate knowl-
edge. Yet moral disagreements could come about the same way. The key to
Mackie’s refutation of the counterexample is knowledge. Because objective
facts do not cause us to know them, we must search for knowledge; in that
search we often err. But, in order to conclude that moral systems cannot
avoid this problem in the same way scientific disputes do, we must assume
that all people know these objective moral values equally well. This assump-
tion has little in the way of justification.
If there are objective moral values, we have no reason to suppose that
all people know them equally well, and so we can expect some disagree-
ments about morality. These disagreements would be based on one or both
disagreeing parties’ faulty understanding of what the true objective moral
values are. To give an example with a strongly moral aspect, let us look at
the Qur’an. The Qur’an is a book containing codes of conduct that a faith-
ful Muslim must observe, yet those who call themselves devout Muslims
range from the peaceful Sufi mystics to the Jihadists. Both of these groups
read the same book and get wildly different meanings from it. So, even
when the law is written down and easily accessible to all, people will inter-
pret it differently. If we cannot agree upon moral codes that are written for
all to see, I do not see how we are justified in assuming that everyone
must know and understand an unwritten moral code equally well.
Therefore, we can reject (1) and can thereby demonstrate that Mackie has
not adequately supported (3).
Even supposing that there was an objective value that was known
equally well by two parties and that those parties in someway disagreed
about it, this would only show that one of the parties failed to implement
it correctly or that this particular supposedly objective value indeed does
not exist. Disagreement cannot show that the whole set of objective moral
values does not exist, only that one or more value supposedly in the set
does not exist. Such is the fate of arguments of this type, for example, the
related arguments dealing with the problem of evil. If they are sound, they do
not show that God does not exist but that a being with all the properties of
the Absolute cannot exist. There is a possibility that Mackie’s argument
HOWQUEER? 15
could show that some certain moral value or values do not exist, but even
this allows too much. Disagreement as it stands may be explained by
human error in our efforts to understand exactly what the objective moral
values really are.
Richard T. Garner asserts that Mackie makes no attempt to show that
objective values do not exist by such an argument as the one refuted above;
instead, he claims that Mackie’s argument is an argument to best explana-
tion (Garner, “On the Genuine Queerness of Moral Properties and Facts”
140). I will now examine this version, which I have previously called “B,”
but I should note that even if Mackie’s theory best explained our moral sys-
tems, it would not show that there are no objective values; it would only
show that those are not the sort of thing that all people base their morality
on. I say “all” because this disagreement does not exclude the possibility
that some groups may base their morality on objective values.
This version of the argument makes the assumption that there is vast
disagreement among moral codes, this being the anomaly that Mackie’s
moral theory explains better. If there were no vast disagreement, then the
subjectivist would have to explain how so many societies came to behave in
such incredibly similar ways and then idealize those behaviors. Merely mild
disagreement does not show that there are no objective moral values
because objective moral values would help explain the almost overwhelming
consensus of the world’s people. The disagreement among peoples must be
vast enough that it actually counts against the objectivity of values. But
those who make this argument have severely overestimated the level of
disagreement in the world.
Even our moral disagreements rest on a foundation of broad moral
agreement. For example, in the ongoing debate about abortion no one
questions whether it is right or wrong to kill people. Pro-choice advocates
do not condone murder. The questions they raise are about whether a fetus
is a person with a right to life. In other disagreements, only some aspect of
an objective moral value is questioned. For example, death penalty propo-
nents and opponents do not disagree about whether killing people is
morally wrong; the issue is whether it is morally justified, or even required,
in the case of extreme criminals. Even Jihadists appeal to values with which
we can identify. They indiscriminately kill because they truly believe the
16 RUSSELLFARR
West is trying to destroy their people, culture, and religion. We disagree with
their assessment and their methods, but we do not disagree that people
should protect their people, culture, and religion. We may argue with them
to try and convince them that non-violent methods are more appropriate,
but we can identify with their love of their own society. Even sadists appeal
to values we can understand. They inflict pain on others because it gives
them pleasure. We understand why a sadist values pleasure because we
value it ourselves. We non-sadists simply disagree with how the person
achieves such pleasures and would say that the sadist values pleasure
above more important values. We can see that the questions in many of
these disagreements are either about facts or about which moral values
have preeminence, not about two utterly foreign moral values.
That we can even communicate about moral values with people
whose moral codes clash with our own shows some consensus. Those who
have differing moral codes will always justify their practices with avalue we
can understand. Once we realize this, Mackie’s claim to have the better
explanation falters. Did people from separate communities all across the
world independently happen to behave in ways that led them to idealize
nearly all of the same values that all other peoples also idealized? Or is this
agreement explained better by the theory that there is something about
these values that draw all peoples? The disagreements are too few and the
consensus is too wide for us to easily accept Mackie’s theory.
Mackie also argues against objective moral values by discussing their
“queerness,” claiming that objective moral values would be unacceptably
queer both metaphysically and epistemically (Mackie 38). Whatever kinds
of things objective moral values are, they would have to be very strange
entities, so strange that we could not bear it. His metaphysical argument
seems to be:
(8) If there were objective values, they would be unacceptably
queer.
(9) Whatever would be unacceptably queer cannot exist.
From lines 8 and 9 we can deduce:
(10) There are no objective values.
HOWQUEER? 17
The epistemic argument claims that coming to know what objective
moral values are and understanding their authoritative prescriptivity would
require some special faculty. Whatever sensory perception is necessary to
know these objective values would be unacceptably queer. Thus, we can
conclude that we cannot know objective values by an argument similar to
the one above.
Now we ask whether Mackie argues that there are no objective values
at all or that there simply are no objective moral values. If he is claiming
that there are no objective values whatsoever, we must ask by what standard
he can judge moral values as strange. If there were no objective values, such
as aesthetic values, then any standard by which we judge moral values
would have to be completely subjective. And we should ask why we must
choose the subjective standards that label moral values unacceptably queer.
Just as we can freely choose any moral values to live by if there are no objec-
tive values, we can freely choose the standards by which we judge the queer-
ness of objective moral values. And those standards might not label moral
values as queer. In fact, we could claim that objective moral values are the
only things in the universe that are not unacceptably queer, or that a uni-
verse without objective moral values is unacceptably queer. Therefore, if
there are no objective values at all, we can claim objective moral values are
not unacceptably queer.
If Mackie claims that there are some objective values, namely aes-
thetic values, and by these values we could objectively say moral values are
too queer, then we could propose that objective moral values are of the
same kind as the aesthetic values. Moral values would be of a similar type
to the other objective values, and we could know moral values through the
same faculty by which we know the other objective values. Therefore, if
there are some objective values, we can claim that objective moral values
are not unacceptably queer. And because the law of excluded middle dic-
tates that either “there are no objective values” or “there are at least some
object values” is true, we can claim that objective moral values are not unac-
ceptably queer. That is:
(11) If there are no objective values, objective moral values are
not unacceptably queer.
18 RUSSELLFARR
(12) If there are at least some objective values, then objective
moral values are not unacceptably queer.
(13) There are either no objective values or there are at least
some objective values.
(14) Therefore, objective moral values are not unacceptably
queer.
And so, even if we grant Mackie’s assumption that nothing unacceptably
queer exists, we need not conclude that objective moral values do not exist.
Finally, that Mackie finds objective values too strange for comfort
seems an odd argument against their existence. I find electrons to be very
strange. The idea that something can be both a wave and a particle and that
it exists as a definite cloud of probabily until a measurement collapses its
wave function is a very strange notion indeed! If I find some idea strange,
does that count in any way against its truth? Certainly not! Moreover,
Mackie finds objective values unacceptably strange because he construes
them so. He claims that objective values would have to be Platonic Forms—
such Platonic Forms would be strange to be sure, but they are not what
many objectivists claim these values are.
When we are confronted with arguments of this type, we need to
examine the assumptions underlying them. Mackie’s assumptions, that
objective moral values would force a consensus and that objective moral
values would be unacceptably queer, are unfounded. Thus, while I have not
shown that there are objective morals, Ihave shown that Mackie’s argu-
ments from relativity and queerness fail to persuade us that objective moral
values do not exist.
Works Cited
Brink, David O. “Moral Realism and the Skeptical Arguments from
Disagreement and Queerness.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy
62.2 (1984): 111–25.
Garner, Richard T. “On the Genuine Queerness of Moral Properties
and Facts.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy68.2 (1990): 137–46.
Mackie, J.L. Ethics:Inventing Right and Wrong. New York:Penguin Books,
1997.