Aporia Vnl. 6, 1996
Founding an Environmental Ethic on Kant's
Work on Judgments of Beauty
Matthew Faulconer
People often defend the importance of protecting the environment by
appealing to the benefits it provides us. For example, we often hear that
we ought to protect the rain forest because it produces oxygen we need
or because many of the species in it will prove medically useful. But
should we preserve the environment because, in some sense, it is valuable
in itself, not just valuable for our benefit? In the case of the rain forest,
the best way to protect it may be to explain our dependence on it, since
one of the easiest things to convince people to do is to save their own
skin. However, not all habitats and species obviously benefit us. Though
some argue that protecting the environment is always in our best
interest in the long run, many others argue that we should protect the
environment regardless of whether it is in our best interest to do so.
They say we have obligations to the environment in itself.
The belief that we have obligations to certain things because they
have inherent value is Kantian. However, according to Kant, the cate
gorical imperative, which is the basis of all moral judgments, denies that
we have obligations to the environment in itself. Still, I will argue
that we have obligations to the environment in itself and that though
Kant's ethics denies this, his work on judgments of beauty provides a
foundation for such obligations. To do this, I will (a) show the impor
tance of the categorical imperative,( b) explain why nature cannot have
value in itself, (c) consider the problem of environmental questions if
Matthew is a junior majoring in philosophy and ecology at Brigham Young
University. He is planning to pursue graduate studies in philosophy.
60 MATTHEW FAULCONER
nature has no inherent value, and (d) ground our obligations to the
environment in Kant's philosophy of judgments of beauty. My point is
not that Kant's wotk on judgments of beauty shows that he believed we
have obligations to the environment. Instead I argue that Kant's work
on judgments of beauty offers a foundation for an environmental ethic—
an ethic which entails obligations to the environment in itself.
A. The Importance of the Categorical Imperative
The categorical imperative says that "I ought never to act except
in such a way that I can also will that my maxim should become a uni
versal law"( Groundwork 70). Kant believes that this principle is the sole
foundation for all moral judgments. Whether or not we agree that the
categorical imperative alone serves as the sole foundation for all moral
judgments, we would be foolish not to take this ptinciple seriously,
since there is no question that people justify their judgments of what is
moral or immoral by appealing to principles similar to Kant's categorical
imperative.
One could counter that since one of the most common ways to jus
tify calling an act immoral is to point out the bad result the act has (or
could have), it is not clear that the categorical imperative is generally
used by people. However, even when people give the negative result of
an act as justification for calling it immoral, they must mean something
more than just what they have said; if the only justification for calling a
thing immoral were the result of the act, what is called immoral would
merely be imprudent (Groundwork 70).
Clearly, people use a principle like the categorical imperative to
distinguish between the moral and immoral when they appeal to the
"golden rule." The golden rule states;" Do unto others as you would have
them do unto you." This rule is similar to the categorical imperative.
This can be seen by considering the reasoning used to determine that an
action is wrong. For example, according to the categorical imperative,
since logically I cannot want everyone to steal other people's things, I
should not steal another person's things. According to the golden rule,
since I do not want anyone to steal my things, I should not steal anyone
else's things. Thus, the categorical imperative is an abstract and univer
sal form of the justifications we commonly give for regarding an act as
moral or immoral (Groundwork 71).
FOUNDING AN ENVIRONMENTAL ETHIC 61
B. Nature Cannot Have Value in and of Itself
The categorical imperative requires that we treat others as the
equals of ourselves. It says nothing at all about nonrational beings. And
since for Kant the categorical imperative is the foundation of all moral
law, according to him we have moral obligations only toward other
people. Kant argues that the only foundation for the moral law is this:
"rational nature exists as an end in itself" (Groundwork 96). Thus, the
categorical imperative becomes: "act in such a way that you always treat
humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of another,
never simply as a means, but always at the same time as an end"
(Groundwork 96). The only obligation we can have to animals and
plants is an obligation we have toward other people who are benefited
by animals and plants, since only people are ends in themselves.
Aldo Leopold would disagree. He concludes his essay "The Land
Ethic" by saying," A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity,
stability, and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends
otherwise" (Rolston 18). Leopold suggests that we have obligations to
the environment in itself. But even if Kant is wrong, even if we have
obligations to the nonrational world, surely these obligations are not
the same as our obligations to other people. It is hard to take the idea
seriously that killing a tree is like killing a person. We recognize a great
difference between killing a person and killing a tree because, as 1 will
argue, though people have value in themselves, trees do not. This claim
is similar to Kant's ethical claim that we have obligations only to people.
However, against Kant, 1 will argue that, though only people have value
in themselves, we nevertheless have obligations to the nonrational
world. But first, consider why nature cannot have value in itself.
A thought experiment illustrates the difference between what we
can value in itself and what we cannot. Imagine sacrificing a whole
group of people for something we call valuable. We know people are
valuable in themselves. Thus, if the natural world is not inherently valu
able, it would be impossible to justify sacrificing people to save it. Of
course, even if the natural world is not inherently valuable, we might
imagine a justified case of sacrificing some people to save it because
other people depend on it. But in such a case, people are not being sac
rificed for the natural world; people are being sacrificed for the people
who depend on the natural world. To see whether we can value nature
62 MATTHEW FAULCONER
in and of itself, we must consider whether we could justify sacrificing
the whole human race to save some huge portion of the nonrational
world, such as the Brazilian rain forest. The genetic diversity of the rain
forest is much greater than that of the human population. The number
of plants and animals is far greater than the number of people, yet we
could not justify sacrificing the human race to save the rain forest. The
reason we could not seems obvious: the world without any possibility of
a rational being' to evaluate it would be meaningless and hence valueless.
In ethical questions it is easy to believe that what is in one's best
interest also happens to be what is correct. For this reason, it is not always
wise to trust an intuition that is in our best interest just because it seems
obviously correct. Consider, therefore, a fuller argument for why we can
not value the nonrational world in and of itself, without any rational
being to contemplate it. We cannot value such a world because we can
not even imagine it. Those who believe that they could imagine a world
without any rational being to contemplate it forget that the world they
would imagine would be a world contemplated at least by themselves. A
world that rationality can have no part in is, by definition, to us as ratio
nal creatures only a void. It is impossible for us to talk about the value of
such a world, for we can have nothing to do with it. Therefore, it is
beyond our ability to recognize inherent value in the nonrational world.
Of course, one could object that a world of only nonrational beings
can have value because there is a possibility of that world evolving a
rational being, or the possibility of rational beings from another world
visiting it. Both of these responses resolve the problem by claiming
that such a world in some sense would not be without a rational being.
In other words, these responses seem to concede that a world without
rational beings in any sense (with no hope of them whatsoever) has
no value. But, if we could recognize nonrational beings as inherently
valuable, then surely we would recognize a world of only these beings
as valuable in itself. But, as we can see, we cannot recognize a world with
'Some might say that there are creatures other than humans which are
rational. They might mention God or might claim that certain animals have a
form of rationality. The relevant question, though, is whether we can assign
value to nonrational beings. Unless all beings are rational, the question of
whether nonrational beings can have value in and of themselves is relevant.
FOUNDING AN ENVIRONMENTAL ETHIC 63
no rational beings (nor any hope of them) as valuable. It follows that the
environment, which is composed of only nonrational beings, is not
inherently valuable.
C. Environmental Ethics Given that the Environment Lacks
Inherent Value
Kant says that we must never treat humanity "simply as a means"
(Groundwork 96). Utilitarianism, on the other hand, evaluates every
ethical decision on the basis of the total good in the end. Everything is
only a means to the ultimate good; no action is good in itself. This
separation between actions and the standard for judging their moral
worth becomes problematic. There is no final stage for which we could
attempt to calculate the "ultimate good" for all people. That is, the
utilitarian standard for deciding ethical questions is indefinite. How
ever many consequences of possible actions we consider, we have never
looked far enough. For example, even if we attempt to calculate the
consequences of an action for all people within the next century, we
exclude from consideration other consequences beyond the next century.
The categorical imperative escapes this problem. According to it, we
cannot simply address the utility of all possible actions to find the most
ethical choice. We cannot because we have to address people as valuable
in themselves. This avoids the problem of grounding obligations in the
final good by appealing to immediate obligations which are independent
of consequences.
However, according to the categorical imperative we only have
unconditional obligations to other rational beings. This means that
every environmental question reduces to a question to be decided on
the grounds of utility for rational beings. Therefore, in questions dealing
with the environment, the categorical imperative shares the problem of
utilitarian ethics. Since no actions towards the environment are good in
themselves, Kantian ethics here encounters the problem of separating
the actions and the standard for judging those actions. Because there
can be no immediate environmental obligations, and because changes
to the environment affect an indeterminate number of rational beings,
the standard for judging the morality of such changes is indefinite. Thus,
like utilitarian ethics, Kantian ethics is in principle unable to decide if
an act toward the environment is moral.
64 MATTHEW FAULCONER
This problem becomes obvious in practical situations. For example,
the Supreme Court and then the Endangered Species Committee
stopped the construction of the $116-million Tellico Dam in otder to
save a small fish, Percina tanasi. Later Congress voted to finish the dam
and to transplant the fish despite the risk that the ttansplant would not
be successful (Rolston 74). Those in Congress who made the decision
knew close to nothing about ecology. They had no idea what the result
of not saving the Percina tanasi would be. Since they had no idea what
the consequences of their actions would be, their decision was com
pletely arbitrary by utilitarian and Kantian standards alike. However,
even if only the best ecologists today had been consulted, their decision
would have been no less arbitrary by these standards. The best ecologists
today cannot "determine with confidence the number of species that a
habitat can suppott" or "provide the precise predictions often needed for
environmental policy making" (Schradder-Frechette 3). Not even the
best ecologists have any idea what long-term effects choosing to elimi
nate the Percina tanasi would have. Not can we avoid the problem of not
knowing the future by weighing the chances that eliminating the Percina
tanasi will have a good or bad effect in the long run. We do not even have
enough infotmation to have a good idea of these chances. Few good ecol
ogists doubt the importance of the rain forest, but most environmental
questions are not as simple as whether or not we should preserve the rain
forest. Many cases are like the case of the Tellico Dam and Percina tanasi.
In these cases, a decision based on consequences is impossible because we
do not know how what we do will affect the environment.
If we decide environmental questions without assuming obligations
to the environment in itself, we are faced with mostly arbitrary decisions.
The categorical imperative in these cases suggests that we should make
a decision based on utility fot rational beings. Clearly this is problematic.
In principle there is no way to know all the consequences of any action,
and we ate generally ignorant of even the more immediate consequences.
For nonarbitrary decisions to be possible, actions toward the environ
ment must not be tight or wrong merely because of their consequences.
D. Grounding Environmental Obligations in Judgments of Beauty
The fact that nature has no value in itself seems to suggest that
we cannot have obligation toward the environment in itself. Obligation
FOUNDING AN ENVIRONMENTAL ETHIC 65
to something in itself obligates all rational beings regardless of their
individual circumstances. Many people bold, as I do, that we have such
moral obligations to the environment. And even if these beliefs are
misguided, the claim to such obligations must be reckoned with. How
do such claims about the environment arise?
For an environmental ethic to exist, we must have a scientific
understanding of the environment sufficient to recognize that our
actions change the environment, sometimes in drastic ways. If we do not
recognize that we can influence the environment, then no environmen
tal ethic is possible. We must know that our actions have consequences.
Clearly, simply recognizing that one's actions have consequences does
not establish obligation. Still, it is important that we recognize that to
have an environmental ethic one must have this level of understanding
of the environment. This in part explains the relative newness of envi
ronmental ethical claims. It is not surprising that such obligations were
not recognized sooner, since we only recently recognized that our
actions can significantly influence the environment.
In order to understand what other factors may account for the
claim that we have environmental obligations, consider the people who
make these claims and the justification they give. Those who claim that
we have environmental obligations are often those people who work or
recreate in nature. They are often the people who derive pleasure from
nature. For this reason, they may try to justify environmental obligation
by saying that nature is valuable in itself because it gives them pleasure.
Clearly though, this pleasure cannot obligate us to nature in itself.
Though some make this appeal, this justification fails, since rather than
showing that nature is valuable in itself, it shows only that it is valuable
insofar as it gives them pleasure.
Another justification that they commonly give is more helpful.
Those who claim that nature is inherently valuable are often people
who find nature beautiful. Rather than arguing that we should pro
tect nature because it gives us pleasure, these people justify protecting
nature by appealing to its beauty. If judgments of beauty provide no
foundation for obligation, then claims that we have environmental
obligations are perhaps the result of misunderstanding the nature of
judgments of beauty. However, I will show that judgments of beauty do
provide this foundation. Because of their peculiar nature, judgments of
beauty force us to accept obligations to nature in itself.
66 MATTHEW FAULCONER
When faced with an environmental question, one can consider
nature to be valuable either in itself or only as it affects humanity.
According to the categorical imperative, we ought only to consider the
effects that different environmental solutions to a given problem will
have on humanity. I will call this type of assessment a consequence-
based assessment. As I will show, such an evaluation will always be
incomplete for anyone who finds nature beautiful. Anyone who finds
nature beautiful cannot assess the value of a beautiful object in nature
without considering the benefit that beauty provides for humanity,
because surely beautiful objects are beneficial. But attempting to assess
the value of beauty in terms of its consequences is problematic. No such
assessment completely captures that value because every such assess
ment considers only the subjective responses of individuals. Since we
are assessing the value of beauty for rational beings, their responses are
the standard for assessing value. But if our evaluation of beauty merely
evaluates the responses evoked by the beautiful, then beauty is reduced
to something which can make no objective claim.
When an object is judged beautiful, this judgment demands uni
versal agreement (Judgment 54). (Even though what is beautiful is not
universally agreed on, any aesthetic claim makes a universal demand for
such an assent.) When a person asserts that an object is beautiful, he or
she asserts that all rational beings should find it beautiful. This is the
essential difference between the beautiful and the agreeable. To say that
something is agreeable is merely to say that it is agreeable to me; no uni
versal assent is expected (Judgment 55). So, if we hold that beautiful
objects are valuable in a way that merely agreeable objects are not, then
any assessment of the value of their beauty must take into account
the universal nature of aesthetic claims. But since a consequence-
based assessment of the value of the beautiful has access only to the
subjective responses of individuals, such an assessment can never cap
ture the importance of the objective demand of a beauty claim. The
consequence-based assessment assesses the beautiful as if it were merely
the agreeable.
Ethical deliberations about nature require us to assess the value of
the beautiful. The only way to avoid reducing this value to the value
of the agreeable is to recognize the universal demands made by aesthetic
judgments. To the extent that we say that the beautiful is more valuable
than the merely agreeable, we must acknowledge the beautiful to be
FOUNDING AN ENVIRONMENTAL ETHIC 67
valuable in itself. For if the beautiful were valuable only because of its
beneficial effects, there would be no distinction between its value and
that of the agreeable. There is such a distinction: we cannot claim that
something is beautiful without necessarily claiming that it is beautiful—
and hence valuable—to all rational beings. But what is valuable to all
rational beings is necessarily valued by any rational being in any situa
tion whatsoever. Whatever is necessarily valued by all rational beings is
valuable in itself. And whatever is valuable in itself morally obligates us,
since we must desire it categorically and not merely hypothetically.
Thus, to claim that nature is beautiful is to claim that we have obliga
tions to nature in itself. This may seem to contradict my earlier claim
that nature in itself lacks value. However, the claim here is that beauty
has value in itself. Nature can only be beautiful when presented to
rational beings. TTierefore, the peculiar nature of judgments of beauty
requires that we accept obligations to nature in itself, even though
nature in itself lacks value.^
E. Conclusion
In this discussion of the categorical imperative, it is clear that
Kant believes that we have obligations only toward other people. Kant
does not say that the beauty of the environment requires obligations to
nature in itself. Still, the link between the aesthetic and the moral is
very important for Kant. According to him," the beautiful is the symbol
of the morally good" (Judgment 228). It is a symbol of the morally good
because the same rule that allows us to recognize judgments of beauty as
universal allows us to recognize morality as universal (Judgment 227-28).
It is this similarity between judgments of beauty and moral judgments
that makes possible obligation to the environment in itself.
Without such obligation, environmental decisions must be based
on consequences and must therefore be arbitrary. In principle we can
not know all the consquences of any action. Further, we are usually
unable to predict even relatively immediate consequences. This suggests
that there must be a better way to make environmental decisions than
^Thanks to Michael Durham for his critical comments on and helpful
revisions of this section.
68 MATTHEW FAULCONER
judging the consequences of possible actions. This other way is founded
on the peculiar nature of judgments of beauty, which requires us to
accept obligations to the environment in itself even though the envi
ronment in itself has no value.
Knowing that we have obligations to the environment in itself
does not make deciding environmental questions simple. One of the
difficulties is that there can be no principle in environmental ethics
that accounts for environmental obligations as the categorical impera
tive accounts for obligations toward other people. No such principle can
exist because environmental obligations depend on recognizing nature
as beautiful, and no principle alone can account for how we decide what
is beautiful. Still, we can have an agreed upon standard. This standard is
possible because in judgments of beauty there is a standard: good taste.
Of course, since not everyone has good taste, not everyone will agree on
what our environmental obligations ate. However, just as we can reach a
general consensus among those with good taste as to what constitutes
good art, we can hope for a general consensus in environmental ethics
among those who acquire a taste for the beauty of nature.
Works Cited
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Judgment. Trans. Werner S. Pluhar.
Indianapolis: Hacket, 1987.
. Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. Trans. H.J . Paton. New
York; Harper, 1964.
Schrader-Frechette, K. S. Method in Ecology: Strategies for Conservation.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1993.
Rolston, Holmes. Philosophy Gone Wild: Essays in Environmental Ethics.
Buffalo: Prometheus, 1986.