Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
Thrasymachus and the Order of Pleonexia
Brenner Fissell
Throughout the Platonic corpus, one finds that Socrates spends much
of his time engaged in dialectic with the sophists. Among the most famous
of these characters is Thrasymachus, the character who dominates the
first book of The Republic. Thrasymachus’s world view is a topic of heated
disagreement among scholars. Many different interpretations have been
proposed, some at complete odds with others. In this paper I will briefly
explain some of these interpretations, and then advance my own. I believe
that Thrasymachus’s doctrine is driven by the primacy of self-interest (ple-
onexia). This pleonexia is not seen as a vice, but is in fact the predominant
force that guides human existence. This creates an order in which the stron-
gest thrive and the weak die off, which is the way Thrasymachus believes
things should be according to the ways of the universe. Thrasymachus goes
beyond inconsistency, descriptive observation, legalism, and amoralism; he
is an immoralist.
Before turning to my own exegesis, it is useful to look at what others
have been saying about Thrasymachus. One view that has been put for-
ward is that Thrasymachus in fact makes no consistent argument. Joseph
Maguire is the most notable proponent of this interpretation. He narrows
down Thrasymachus’s doctrine to contain three propositions regarding
justice: the advantage of the stronger, obedience to laws, and the good of
another (Maguire 143). The crux of his argument is that the third state-
ment cannot be reconciled with the first two. “Clearly,” Maguire points
out, “. . . ‘the advantage of the stronger’ . . . is not compatible with (3)
‘justice is another’s advantage’, unless ‘another’ is defined as the ruler . . .
But this would leave us with the same problem we already had; viz., that
Brenner Fissell is a senior at Georgetown University majoring in government. After
graduation, he is pursuing graduate studies in political thought and intellectual his-
tory at the University of Cambridge, UK.
36 Brenner Fissell
the ruler himself is left outside his laws, and, therefore, outside justice and
injustice” (147–48). From the perspective of the ruler, he cannot obey
both the first and third propositions concurrently. Maguire determines
in the end that the third statement was actually imposed upon him by
Plato, the author. Maguire writes, “It is, rather, Plato’s device to move from
political statements about ‘right’ to the very different question, whether
observance of ‘right’ (i.e., justice) is more or less advantageous than
non-observance (i.e., injustice)” (163).
Others have written that Thrasymachus is purposefully presented
in this incoherent manner. According to these thinkers, he is meant to
be seen as incompetent in the argument with Socrates. P. P. Nicholson
explains the thought of one commentator: “Jowett depicts Thrasymachus
as a vain clown and ‘a mere child in argument,’ implying that consistency
was beyond him” (Nicholson 213).
Another manner of understanding Thrasymachus is proposed by
C. N. Johnson. Johnson argues that Thrasymachus is merely making empir-
ical observations about the world he sees, and is not making a normative
argument. He is not trying to define justice at all, and is simply point-
ing out how it operates in the real world. “[Thrasymachus] was not offering
definitions. Instead he was making empirical generalizations about how
justice works,” Johnson says, “and supporting these general statements by
bringing forth several sets of observations” (137). In this regard, he should
be seen not as an “immoralist preaching injustice but a political scien-
tist attempting to make . . . statements about the operation of justice
in the observable world of politics” (137). Therefore the inconsistency of
the statements doesn’t matter, as Thrasymachus is not attempting to offer
“definitions” (137).
Others scholars, going beyond these interpretations, have argued that
Thrasymachus’s doctrine is indeed internally consistent. George Hourani
presents a “legalist” interpretation of Thrasymachus. Thrasymachus states
that justice is advantage of the stronger, the stronger will be the rulers, and
rulers will make the laws conducive to their advantage. Therefore obedi-
ence to law is how one is “just,” as this obedience benefits the stronger.
Hourani writes that “‘Justice as the interest of the stronger’ is meant not
as a definition but as an important generalization” (111). Thrasymachus
throws this statement in immediately, but it takes some time before the
reader comes to understand all the presumptions upon which it rests.
The general statement Thrasymachus first makes regarding justice is that it
is “advantage of the stronger.” When explicated, though, justice is found to
rest upon something else. “It soon appears that behind his major assertion
lies another one which is more truly a definition,” Hourani states, “that jus-
Thasymachus and The Order OF PleOnexia 37
tice is obedience to the laws” (120). Hourani believes that Thrasymachus
is arguing for legalism.
Alan Bloom contests Hourani’s interpretation on the basis
of Thrasymachus’ response to Clitophon. Clitophon suggests that
Thrasymachus means “the advantage of the stronger is what the stronger
believes to be his advantage” (Republic 340a). It does not matter whether
or not the laws are actually advantageous, only that they emanate from the
proper authority. This is positivism, or the legalism described by Hourani.
However, as Bloom notes, Thrasymachus rejects Clitophon’s aid. He has
something deeper than this in mind.
After this rejection, Thrasymachus enters into his discussion of the
craft of ruling: “A ruler, insofar as he is a ruler, never makes errors” (341a).
According to Thrasymachus, while one is erring he is neither a “ruler” nor
“stronger” (340c). Bloom writes that “Thrasymachus encumbers himself
with the responsibility for what amounts to a moral imperative, requir-
ing rulers to be selfish with perfect knowledge” (329). Bloom believes that
Thrasymachus’s ideal ruler combines knowledge and strength to serve his
pleonexia (331). “Thrasymachus looks at politics from the point of view of
the man who wants to live well and has understood the nature of justice”
(Bloom 330). This is why he rejects Clitophon’s suggestion. The rulers
who are strongest “should” always act with “scientific selfishness,” other-
wise they lose their legitimate claim to the title of “ruler” (Bloom 329).
Thrasymachus’s insistence on expertise in selfishness cannot be reconciled
with the positivism of Clitophon, which would assert that the essence of
“justice” is only the “apparent advantage” of the laws to the stronger (Bloom
329). This Thrasymachean ideal presupposes an order in the universe, and
goes beyond positivism or legalism. There is not moral chaos; there is a way
things should be.
At this point I will offer my own analysis of Thrasymachus’s state-
ments in Republic I. I will attempt to show that he is presenting an internally
coherent doctrine, as opposed to Maguire’s thesis. Furthermore, I will argue
against Johnson and affirm that Thrasymachus is much more than a mere
political scientist; he is making a normative argument. He is no amoralist;
he is an immoralist. I will then go further into what Bloom has hinted at
when discussing Clitophon.
In describing his rather unsavory definition of justice, Thrasymachus
is not presenting a mere descriptive account of how things play out in
reality. He is not the “man on the street” who is simply “telling it like it
is.” One cannot maintain this position after the passage in 348d, where
Thrasymachus incontrovertibly makes his definition a normative one.
Socrates asks, “You consider unjust people, then, Thrasymachus, to be
clever and good?” He answers affirmatively (348d). Only a few lines below
38 Brenner Fissell
this, one finds that Thrasymachus actually equates “injustice with virtue
and wisdom” (348e). Furthermore, he agrees that “complete injustice is
more profitable than complete justice” (348c). Given these statements, it
is undeniable that Thrasymachus’s discussion is normative. Its coherence,
however, has yet to be proven.
Justice, when discussed by Thrasymachus, is political justice. For the
most part, he is talking about the relationships between rulers and subjects.
Almost all of Thrasymachus’s arguments regarding justice, as well as the
examples he employs, support this notion. In his extended explanation
of “advantage of the stronger,” he gives the example of the ruling regimes
in a city and the subjects who obey them (338d). Furthermore, the discus-
sion of the “shepherds and cowherds” which Socrates and Thrasymachus
disagree about is also a ruler-subject relationship (343b, 345c). Finally,
Thrasymachus’s extended description of “the whole of injustice” reveals
that it is tyranny that he has in mind (344b). This is a fundamentally politi-
cal discussion and is not concerned with subject-subject relations. Given
the political schema of subject-ruler, it is necessary to discuss what “just”
and “unjust” mean for each according to Thrasymachus.
Let us first take the simplest perspective: the subject in relation to the
ruler. “Justice” for the subject consists in benefiting the ruler and thereby
harming one’s self. Thrasymachus says, “Justice is nothing other than the
advantage of the stronger . . . and in each city this element is stronger,
namely, the ruler” (338c–d). This is all from the point of the view of the
subject. He who is being “just” here is he who obeys. “Justice is really
the good of another,” Thrasymachus says, “the advantage of the stronger
and the ruler, and harmful to the one who obeys and serves” (343c). The
“sheep” do justice to their shepherd by grazing peacefully and “fattening”
themselves up for “their master’s good” (343b).
Injustice on the part of the subject is then the opposite of this self-
sacrifice: it is selfishness, or pleonexia. Pleonexia is roughly equivalent to
greed, or the constant desire to acquire more of any good for one’s self.
Thrasymachus agrees with Socrates’ proposition that the unjust person
“will strive to get the most he can for himself and from everyone” (349c).
This is the elevation of self-interest above all else, and is certainly the oppo-
site of the “justice” described earlier. Perhaps the strongest evidence that
Thrasymachus’s idea of injustice is coterminous with pleonexia is a state-
ment he makes after his explanation of tyranny. “As I said from the first,”
he states, “justice is what is advantageous to the stronger, while injustice
is to one’s own profit and advantage” (344b). While still looking at things
from the perspective of the weak subject, Thrasymachus’s doctrine is quite
clear. Problems only arise when one shifts to the point of view of the ruler
in relation to the subject. What is justice and injustice for the strong?
Thasymachus and The Order OF PleOnexia 39
In my reading, Thrasymachus’s argument does not fall apart in the
shift of perspective from subject to ruler. Scholars see a breakdown in
the argument because Thrasymachus praises injustice constantly. How
is the ruler supposed to be unjust (self-regarding) when anything he does
to benefit himself is also what benefits the stronger, and is therefore “just”
according to the earlier definition? The solution to this problem is to make
a distinction between aspiring ruler or ascendant tyrant and the “estab-
lished” ruler. Whenever Thrasymachus discusses and praises injustice as
pleonexia, he makes it clear that this must be the most complete injustice:
becoming the tyrant, ruler, or “stronger.” Furthermore, this injustice he
recommends is on the part of the subject. It is given to he who wishes
to become tyrant but is not yet so. In referring to established regimes or
tyrants, Thrasymachus does not advise “injustice.” Even though the rulers
are still acting self-interestedly, they are no longer committing “injustice.”
Essentially, if one takes injustice to its greatest extreme, the designation of
his actions changes. Let us look at the text for evidence of this.
Thrasymachus calls self-interested action while still a subject “injus-
tice,” but if the subject can somehow manage to become the ruler through
the most complete injustice, this word will no longer apply. Thrasymachus
advises Socrates, “turn your thoughts to the most complete injustice . . . .
This is tyranny, which through stealth or force appropriates the property of
others” (344a). The complete injustice which Thrasymachus describes here
is the action of “appropriating” everything. The “injustice” is not the sitting
tyranny, but the coup by which the usurpation takes place. This action is
described here as unjust because, while usurping, the ascendant tyrant is still
in fact the subject. This usurpation must happen, therefore, “all at once”
or the partial appropriations would quickly be caught as acts of injustice
(344a). Thrasymachus gives the examples of “temple-robbers, kidnappers,
housebreakers, robbers, and thieves” who commit “only part of injustice”
and are consequently “punished and greatly reproached” (344b). If the usur-
pation or “appropriation” is complete, however, “he is called happy and
blessed . . . by all those who learn that he has done the whole of injustice”
(344c). Once the usurper is the established tyrant, no one punishes him
for his pleonexia, because it has encompassed the entire city. He is now the
“stronger.” “So, Socrates, injustice, if it is on a large enough scale, is stron-
ger, freer, and more masterly than justice,” Thrasymachus says (344c). Note
the important qualifier: if it is large enough. What Thrasymachus is saying
here is that the pleonexia of the subject, if pushed to the extreme of tyranny,
is better than the “justice” of the subject which benefits the rulers. He is
talking about subjects here when he praises injustice, and it is injustice
aimed at political usurpation. Injustice in its highest form is transformed
40 Brenner Fissell
into something else. The aim of injustice, then, is to legitimize itself.
One finds evidence for this in a later passage as well.
Thrasymachus makes the assertion that injustice is a “virtue” and that
those who practice it are “clever and good” (348d). However, this is with an
important caveat. It is only of “those who are completely unjust, who can
bring cities and whole communities under their power,” that he is speaking
(348d). “Perhaps you think I meant pickpockets,” Thrasymachus retorts,
“but they aren’t worth mentioning by comparison to what I’m talking
about” (348d). The injustice that he is praising is not the petty dealings of
thieves and private men; Thrasymachus is talking about the supreme politi-
cal injustice of usurping the state and bringing it under one’s power. He is
talking about making one’s self the “stronger” one who will be advantaged
by the subjects. Partial injustice is not enough to even be compared to this.
It is only in this context of political usurpation that Thrasymachus claims
that “injustice is fine and strong” (348e). Injustice as a means to tyranny
through usurpation, however, can only be committed by one who is not him-
self the tyrant. Injustice in this sense is the injustice of the aspirant ruler. In
both these passages the praise of injustice refers to the injustice of the hope-
ful tyrant who is still a subject. Two elements characterize Thrasymachus’s
extolment of injustice: The actor must currently be a subject, and the ulti-
mate aim of his injustice must be complete injustice (i.e. tyranny).
In Thrasymachus’s explanations of established tyranny, one finds a dif-
ferent portrayal. The established ruler makes laws which are advantageous
to himself, and obedience to these laws is consequently “justice” for the
subjects (339a). Justice for the subject, however, enjoins different actions
than justice for the ruler. As the strongest, the ruler acts justly by being
self-regarding. The “advantage of the stronger” means his own advantage.
Therefore, by legislating laws beneficial to himself, the ruler is still just. The
most important evidence for this interpretation is Thrasymachus’s discus-
sion of the “craft” of ruling. He argues that the ruler qua ruler will always
act in a way beneficial to himself, and therefore justly. The moment he
ceases to do this, he ceases to be functioning as a ruler. “Do you think
I’d call someone who is in error stronger at the very moment he errs?”
Thrasymachus asks (340c). Through error, rulers renounce their title of
“stronger,” and once this is absent they are not properly called rulers. Rulers
are not infallible, but when they mistakenly act in a manner deleterious to
their advantage they are not “rulers” in that action. “A ruler, insofar as he is
a ruler, never makes errors and unerringly decrees what is best for himself,
and this his subject must do,” says Thrasymachus (341a). Established rulers
can never act unjustly, because while functioning as rulers they will never
fail to enact laws beneficial to themselves. Actions proceeding from pleon-
exia are characterized as “unjust” while one is a subject, but once he has
Thasymachus and The Order OF PleOnexia 41
made the completely selfish move and become ruler, the pleonectic man
acts “justly” given Thrasymachus’s understanding.
In preserving the distinction between the aspiring tyrant and the
established one, Thrasymachus’s statements can be brought to coherence.
Scholars argue that, from the perspective of the ruler, “advantage of the
stronger” and “advantage of another” cannot be reconciled. However,
Thrasymachus uses these different ideas in different contexts. When
speaking in the context of established rulers, he uses the first proposition:
advantage of the stronger. When talking about those who are subjects or
aspiring tyrants, though, he says justice is the advantage of another and
recommends injustice. There is something that changes when one actu-
ally becomes “the stronger” and is the ruler. Thrasymachus foreshadows
what his opposite, Glaucon, says in Book II: “The extreme of injustice
is to be believed to be just without being just” (361a). For Thrasymachus
the extreme of injustice somehow results in “justice.” By using injustice to
usurp the reins of the state and thereby committing the most complete
act of injustice, the subject becomes the ruler and will always thereafter act
justly qua ruler. Injustice is “profitable” precisely in that it can change you
from subject to ruler (348c).
Now one begins to see the sinister coherence of Thrasymachus’s doc-
trine. This is not just wordplay; it is no accident that he refuses to allow
rulers qua rulers to act unjustly. When one commits the complete injustice
and becomes the “stronger,” or the ruler, he is invested with a certain legiti-
macy or license to act out of pleonexia. No longer is his self-interested action
considered “unjust,” it is in fact “justice” since he is the king of the hill.
While some would argue that this transformation is because the rulers are
the ones who define “justice,” I believe there is something deeper going on.
Thrasymachus’s rejection of Clitophon’s positivism means that legitimacy
must be grounded in some order. The stronger lose this legitimacy when
they violate the order which undergirds the entire Thrasymachean system.
This order or reality is pleonexia and the competition it engenders.
Thrasymachus is no ethical nihilist or amoralist, he is an immoralist.
He does not see a chaotic world where there are no rules. In fact, the one
normative rule that never changes is that one should always act out of
self-interest. For Thrasymachus, “justice” is not a prescription for action;
it contains no “ought.” The only “ought” is self-interest. One ought to act
unjustly while a subject, and once he becomes the ruler his actions (while
they remain self-interested) are now just. This is “Nietszchean immoralism,”
(Chappell 2) or a theory of “natural right in an immoralist sense” (Maguire
158). Maguire describes this interpretation well: “There is a moral obliga-
tion, arising from the nature of man, for everybody, subject and ruler alike,
42 Brenner Fissell
to be ‘unjust’ in the other sense, not of disobeying laws, but of seeking his
own advantage (pleonexia)” (158).
The deeper layer to this order of self-interest is a differentiation
through the resultant competition. Thrasymachus’s portrait of the happi-
est person is the tyrant. Throughout the debate, what constantly recurs in
this portrayal is not just pleonexia, but strength and knowledge. These are two
elements that Bloom sees as salient (329). Recall that Thrasymachus states,
“A person of great power outdoes everyone else” (344a). The criterion
for being the “ruler” is that one is part of the “stronger element” (338d).
Beyond strength, the ruler must have expert knowledge. These two are intri-
cately connected. “Do you think I’d call someone who is in error stronger
at the very moment he errs?” Thrasymachus asks (340c). This error is one
of knowledge: “It’s when his knowledge fails him that he makes an error”
(340e). In order to be the tyrant, one requires both strength and expert
knowledge of how to advantage one’s self. Given that the tyrant will possess
superior strength and knowledge, he deserves to be on top. Those who serve
do so out of “high-minded simplicity” while the tyrant’s acts proceed from
“good judgment” (348d). This is why injustice as pleonexia is called “virtue
and wisdom” and later “fine and strong” by Thrasymachus (348e). Those
who are strongest rule, and this is the way things should be.
In a way, Thrasymachus presents a proto-Darwinian argument about
the order of the cosmos. He is the precursor to Callicles, who lays out this
doctrine in the most lucid manner: “Nature itself reveals that it’s a just
thing for the better man and the more capable man to have a greater share
than the worse man and the less capable man” (Gorgias 483d). Paul Shorey,
editor of the Loeb edition of The Republic, agrees that Thrasymachus and
Callicles are presenting essentially the same thing: the “immoralist thesis”
(x). If one has strength and knowledge, then his pleonexia is legitimate. If
he can somehow manage to get more than others, he is entitled to keeping
it. Pleonexia creates its own order through competition in which there is
survival of the fittest. Thrasymachus is no clown in argument, and his views
are more widely accepted than one may think. Thrasymachus describes a
“law of the jungle” that many American capitalists would likely agree with.
Works Cited
Bloom, Allan. The Republic of Plato. New York: Basic Books, 1968.
Chappell, T. D. J. “The Virtues of Thrasymachus.” Phronesis 38.1 (1993):
1–17.
Johnson, Curtis. Socrates and the Immoralists. Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books, 2005.
Hourani, George F. “Thrasymachus’ Definition of Justice in Plato’s
Republic.” Phronesis 7.2 (1962): 110–20.
Maguire, Joseph P. “Thrasymachus—Or Plato?” Phronesis 16.2 (1971):
142–63.
Nicholson, P. P. “Unravelling Thrasymachus’ Arguments in ‘The Republic.’”
Phronesis 19.3 (1974): 210–32.
Plato. Complete Works. Ed. John M. Cooper. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett,
1997.
———. The Republic: Books 1–5. Trans. Paul Shorey. Loeb Classical Library.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1930.