NECESSARY TRUTH AND THE TRANSCENDENTAL
INTERPRETATION OF
DESCARTES'S COGITO ARGUMENT
Therese Foote
Perhaps the two most famed occurrences of the idea of necessary
truth in Descartes's works appear in the Discourse on Method and
Meditation II, each as an integral part of what we will call the Cogito
Argument.! In the Meditations we read; "After having reflected well and
carefully examined all things, we must come to the definite conclusion
that this proposition: I am, I exist, is necessarily true each time that I
pronounce it, or that I mentally conceive it"( HR 1150; my emphasis).2
And in the Discourse on Method:
But immediately afterwards I noticed that whilst I thus wished to
think all things false, it had to be necessarily that the "1" who
thought this should be something, and remarking that this truth "I
think, therefore I am" was so certain and so assured that all the
most extravagant suppositions brought forward by the skeptics
were incapable of shal^g it, 1 came to the conclusion that I could
receive it without scruple as the first principle of the Philosophy
for which I was seeking.( HR 1101; my emphasis)^
The strange thing about the Cogito Argument is that it seems
Descartes depends upon necessary truth to establish his "first principle,"
and yet it would also seem that prior to the statement of the Cogito in
each case he has argued that necessary truths are subject to doubt.
Necessary truths are not subject to the same doubt as sensory data, says
Descartes, "For whether I am awake or asleep, two and three together
always form five, and the square can never have more than four sides,
and it does not seem possible that truths so clear and apparent can be
!This essay was awarded first prize in the 1994 David H.Y am contest.
2"HR" refers to the Haldane and Ross English translation; "AT" refers to
the Adam and Tarmary French and Latin edition. Roman numerals indicate
volume.
^Translation slightly altered to convey more explicitly the sense of necessity
in the phrase "ilfaUait necessairement "
2 T herese Foote
suspected of any falsity [or uncertainty]" (HR I 147). Yet we can make
mistakes in even the simplest calculations; and then it is also possible that
"some evil genius not less powerful than deceitful, has employed his
whole energies in deceiving me"( HR I 148). Thus, necessary truths are
stdll subject to doubt—yet the Cogito Argument is said to be necessarily
true. It seems highly tmlikely that anyone would employ so blatant
a contradiction in founding so extensive a philosophical system. We
are led to wonder whether the necessary truth of "cogito, ergo sum"
(I think, therefore I am) is somehow of a different nature than the neces
sary truths previously rendered dubitable.
Even intuitively it seems that the necessary truths involved might be
of different kinds. A priori necessary truths such as "all bachelors are
urunarried" might be the whispering of some malignant demon, as might
the results of simple arithmetical calculations. While these truths may be
called necessary, they do not necessitate any existential or metaphysical
fact. The knowledge that all bachelors are unmarried does not entail the
knowledge that any actual bachelors exist. However,i n "cogito, ergo sum"
the idea of existence plays a strange role. The Demon Argument does not
render this truth dubitable, since if one were being deceived about it by a
malignant demon, a being would have to be there to be deceived—^but if
this were the case, one could not be deceived about it. What can we learn
about necessary truth and necessity in general from Descartes's Cogito
Argument? What does Descartes mean when he uses "necessarily" in the
context of the Cogito Argument? And what are the further implications of
this claim to necessary truth?
To investigate these questions, I will first exairune an interpretation
of the Cogito Argument which I wiU call the transcendental interpreta
tion, since it makes reference to Kant's transcendental philosophy. This is
the only interpretation which offers us a clue for solving the mystery
surrounding Descartes's use of the term "necessarily" in the Cogito
Argument—as will be shown by contrasting it with some other important
interpretations, namely, the standard inferential theory and Jaakko
Hintikka's performative theory. Then I am going to consider some
contemporary philosophico-logical theories about necessity. While we
tend to think in terms of the trusty Kantian labels of a priori-analytic,
a pn'on-synthetic, and a posteriori-synthetic judgments, this rethmking of
Descartes in terms of transcendental philosophy will paradoxically show
that these Kantian terms are inadequate for describing what is going on in
the Cogito Argument. My conclusion will be that Descartes's argument
provides a possibly unique example of a posteriori necessity, and that this
necessity paves the way for Kant by establishing a distinction between
Transcendental Interpretation 3
subjective certainty, through clear and distinct ideas, and the objective
freedom of things in themselves—since the interesting thing about the
Cogito Argument is that it can also be construed as a priori-contingent
II.
Before I begin my discussion of the several interpretations of the
Cogito Argument, it is important to note that the aim of the Cogito
Argument is not to prove anyone's actual existence, but to show that
there is at least one thing of which one cannot doubt, namely, one's own
existence. That is, the aim of the argument is not to show existence, but
rather indubitability. In Descartes's Principles ofP hilosophy, Principle Vn is
"that we cannot doubt our existence"( HR I 221), not "that we exist."
Furthermore, it is not at all clear how the establishment of one's existence
could lead to the establishment of God's existence. Descartes's establish
ment of the Cogito shows rather that there are clear and distinct ideas
(HR I, Discourse on Method, 102) by means of which res cogitans (literally,
"thinking substance") can also recognize the existence of God. The imme
diate utility of "cogito, ergo sum" is to show that there is at least one thing
that is indubitable. Therefore, a good interpretation of the Cogito
Argument will not ask whether Descartes succeeds in proving his exis
tence, but will focus on the type of indubitability it achieves.
The first interpretation I discuss will be the standard inferential
interpretation. 1 say "standard" inferential interpretation, since the tran
scendental interpretation, as will be seen, also involves the notion of infer
ence. A typical representation of "cogito, ergo sum" as an inference is as a
syllogism with suppressed major premise,f or example:
1. [For aU X, if X thinks then X exists.]
2. Descartes thinks.
3. So Descartes exists.
And then by conditionahzation,
4. So if Descartes thinks, then Descartes exists.
However, this syllogism derives its necessity from being an a priori-
analytic truth. As 1 noted above, Descartes's Demon Argument placed all
a priori necessary truths imder doubt. So all a priori necessary truths such
as this syllogism are not able to achieve the status of indubitability.
Another problem with the standard inference theory is that any
verb can be used in place of "think" and the syllogism is still valid. The
real problem is that, as Hintikka notes, the systems of logic in which
"cogito, ergo sum" can be proved are "based on important existential
presuppositions" (7). In modem logic, the presupposition is expUcit, since it
4 T herese Foote
is assumed that for ar\y bound variable a there exists an x such that x
equals a.
These systems
make more or less tadt use of the assumption that aU the singular
terms with which we have to deal really refer to (designate) some
actually existing individual It turns out, therefore, that we in fact
decided that the sentence "I exist" is true when we decided that the
sentence "I thmk" is of the form B(a)( for the purposes of the usual
systems of hmctional logic). That we were then able to infer (Ex)
(x = a) from B(a) is rmdoubtedly true, but completely beside the
point.( Hintikka 7S)
When we aUow the existential presuppositions of the syllogistic
inference, any verb can be substituted for "think." The action of that verb
would then be dubitable under the category of that which the Dream
Argument renders dubious (i.e., a posteriori-contingent knowledge,
primarily).^ And finally, Descartes himself explicitly says that
when we become aware that we are thinking beings, this is a primi
tive act of knowledge derived from no syllogistic reasoning. He who
says, "I think, hence I am, or exist," does not deduce existence from
thought by a syllogism, but, by a simple act of mental vision, recog
nizes it as if it were a thing that is known per se.( HR II, Reply to
Objections II, 38)
The standard inferential interpretation seems to misread Descartes by
assuming that if the Cogito Argument is called necessarily true, it must be
a syllogism. Under this interpretation, "cogito, ergo sum" is no different
from other truths rendered dubitable for Descartes by the Dream
Argument or the Demon Argument. The net result is that we are no closer
to solving the mystery of Cartesian necessity.
^In other words, when we formulate the Cogito as a syllogism, we actually get
a tautology: For all existents, if an existent thhaks then an existent exists. Thus,
we can substitute "ambulo" (I walk) for "cogito" (I think), and we get the same
effect: For all existents, if an existent walks then an existent exists. But the
knowledge that one is walking, or the action of walking, is rendered dubitable
by the Dream Argument, so one would be able to doubt one's own existence
whenever one doubted oneself to be walking, thinking, etc. Descartes surely did
not intend for the argument to function in this way,a nd in fact it does not.
Transcendental Interpretation 5
Hintikka takes such a rejection of the standard (or syllogistic)
inference theory as the departure point for his performative theory. He
notes that while it is not contradictory for him or anyone else who is
not De Gaulle to say "De Gaulle does not exist/' it is "awkward" if
De Gaulle says this (10). Hintikka asks why this should be so^ but
instead of proffering an explanation, he makes the obvious remark that
it is "existentially inconsistent" for De GauUe to assert that he does not
exist (10). In effect, Hintikka explains the problem of existential inconsis
tency as a problem of existential inconsistency. He further states that
the inconsistency (absurdity) of an existentially inconsistent state
ment can in a sense be said to be of performatory (performative)
character. It depends on an act or "performance," namely on a
certain person's act of uttering a sentence (or of otherwise making
a statement); it does not depend solely on the means used for the
purpose, that is, on the sentence which is being uttered.( 12)
Again, this is somewhat uninformative—^Descartes's Meditations formu
lation," This proposition: 1 am,1 exist, is necessarily true each time that I
pronoimce it, or that 1 mentally conceive it"( HR1150), clearly indicates
that the act or performance of formulating the sentence has something to
do with its necessity; the interesting thing is not this, but the question of
how that experiential element functions in Cartesian necessity.
The performative theory is a description, but not an explanation, of
some of the odd features of the Cogito Argument which 1 mentioned in
my introduction. Hintikka does nothing toward solving the mystery of
how Descartes can call "1 think, therefore I am" a necessary truth, but
merely makes the mystery explicit by using obscure terms like "existen
tial self-verification." Descartes probably does not intend to say "1 know
by means of a tautology (when logic's existential presuppositions
appear explicitly) that 1 am," but rather "It is indubitable that I exist."
How can any existential claim be indubitable? How can it be necessary?
Whether existence works as a predicate at aU has been debated at least
from the time of Kant's statement:" The object, as it actually exists, is not
analytically contained in my concept, but is added to my concept( which
is a determination of my state) synthetically" (505). If the judgment that
something exists is very likely a synthetic judgment, how can "cogito,
ergo sum" be necessary? Is the Cogito Argument, then, simply the
camouflage for an imquestioning "existential faith"? Do we simply say
"I exist," and take our existence as an indubitable ostensive proof of that
statement? And furthermore, by relying on performances are we not
6 T herese Foote
simply falling back once again on the a posteriori contingent truths
susceptible to doubt imder the Dream Argument?
A transcendental interpretation, or transcendental inference
theory, offers an explanation, not merely a description, of the mystery.
The essential principle of the transcendental interpretation is that the
entity to which Descartes's "I" refers is not himself insofar as he consti
tutes an object of experience for himself, but rather the "transcendental
ego," the Bedingung der Mdglichkeit oiler Erfahrung—that is, the presup
positions of the possibility of experience such as the transcendental
unity of apperception and the fact that it must be possible for the "1
think" to accompany all of our presentations. It should not, of course,
be considered anachronistic to say that Descartes refers implicitly to an
entity which Kant later explicitly describes in his critical philosophy.
The possibility of interpreting the Cogito Argument transcenden-
tally was first brought to my attention by the German logician Rainer
Trapp's paper, "'Credo* Me* Cogitare Ergo Scio* Me* Essei/2'—
Descartes's 'Cogito Ergo Sum' Reinterpreted." Trapp differentiates
between the "ego" considered as an object of experience like any other
and the transcendental ego, or "ego*." He makes a similar distinction
between the existence which is presupposed in modem logic, existing
in the maimer of aU objects of experience, "on a par with entities that
might be, or even certainly are, only products of the mind"( existencej) and
existence2, indubitable existence "analytically implied by being a tran
scendental Ego" (256). Trapp then analyzes the Cogito Argiunent in
terms of epistemic logic and argues that Descartes "would have been
justified in arguing for [the] logically stronger and philosophically more
substantial proposition"( 265) that appears in the rather singular title of
his paper. Trapp's conclusion wiU have some importance to our discus
sion of philosophical logic later on.
There is textual evidence for this interpretation of Descartes's "I"
as the transcendental ego. In his Principles of Philosophy, Descartes
states:
For if I say I see, or I walk, I therefore am, and if by seeing and
walking I mean the action of my eyes or my legs, which is the
work of my body, my conclusion is not absolutely certain. .. . But
if I mean only to talk of my sensation, or my consciously seeming
to see or to walk, it becomes quite true because my assertion now
refers only to my mind, which alone is concemed with my feeling
or thinking that I see and I walk.( HR1222)
Transcendental Interpretation 7
While Descartes can doubt the veracity of experience (e.g., whether he
actually sees or walks), he cannot doubt the fact that he has experience.
And while Descartes cannot doubt that he has experience of phenomena,
he would also never assert that the phenomena are objectively real.
From the fact that he has experience, Descartes infers the transcendental
ego as the presupposition of experience. In another passage. Reply
to Objections V, we read; "You have no right to make the inference: I
walk, hence I exist, except in so far as our awareness of walking is a
thought... from the fact that I think that I walk I can very well infer the
existence of the mind which so thiirks, but not that of the body which
walks"( HR II 207). Here we see that "cogito, ergo sum" is an inference,
not according to syllogistic logic, but rather according to transcendental
logic.
From the very fact that Descartes can be aware that he is walking,
from the very fact that his consciousness arranges raw sense data in the
form of experience, Descartes is able to infer a self. This "self" that is
inferred is transcendental in character because by the very fact that it
is the source of experience, it is never directly experienced—or in other
words it transcends experience. Just as the indubitabUity of this infer
ence forms the first principle of Descartes's philosophy, the first prin
ciple of all synthetic judgments for Kant is the transcendental unity of
apperception, derived from essentially the same inference, which stipu
lates that the "I think" must be able to accompany all our presentations.
Hintikka also seems to sense something of the transcendental
character of the Cartesian ego and the transcendental logic underlying
the Cogito Argument. He compares the relation of cogito and sum to the
relation between a process and its product, rather than the standard-
inferential relation of a premise to a conclusion (16). A transcendental
inference theory would correlate "process" with the transcendental ego,
and "product" with experience or the ego as an object of experience, a
"Ding fur mich." A similarly transcendental metaphor that appears in
Descartes's own writing, which Hintikka refers to in the same passage,
is that of the relation between a source of light or lumen and illumina
tion or lux (AT II, Letter to Morin, 13 July 1638, 209). Trapp explains
how this relation leads to a transcendental inference: "My respective
transcendental Ego, consciously performing some mental activity ... is
the only thing which in reflecting I dare et distincte recognise not to be
(only) a product of my mind," by consequence of which "it is the only
thing in itself which I positively know to exist2 (also) as a thing in itself"
(256). The only thing not a product for someone making this transcen
dental inference is the producer, that is, the transcendental ego.
8 T herese Foote
This material or transcendental inference, unlike the syllogistic
one, achieves indubitability. "I think" as a product, namely, experience,
stands in a necessary relation to the transcendental ego or "producer,"
the "I am." What kind of necessity this must be, in consequence, wiU be
seen m the next section.
III.
Through a brief examination of some modern philosophico-
logical theories 1 will show that the transcendental interpretation indi
cates that the "necessary" truth in the Cogito Argument can be viewed
either as an a priori contingent truth or as an a posteriori necessary truth.
I will then conclude that when Descartes mentions necessity, he means
the latter.
The a priori/a posteriori distinction is generally considered an epis-
temological one, whereas analyticity/syntheticity is considered a
semantic, and necessity/contingency a metaphysical notion (Grayling
46). If something is known a priori, it is known or theoretically can be
known "prior to experience," while a posteriori knowledge comes after,
or in, experience. A necessary truth is one that (metaphysically) could
not have been otherwise. If ever a bachelor has existed, it is necessarily
true that he was, or is, an unmarried man. A contingent truth is one
that might have happened otherwise; for example, I am sitting in front
of a computer typing, while it is conceivable that I might be going for
a walk instead. We generally think of necessary truth as something
known a priori, and contingent truth as something known a posteriori.
However, Alvin Plantinga argues in The Nature of Necessity that there is
such a thing as a priori contingent truth. For example, one might know
a priori the contingent but true statement "1 believe that 7+ 5 = 12."
Belief is not (pace Hume) a special brilliance or vividness of idea
or image; there is no specific sort of experience I must have to
know that I believe that 7 + 5 = 12. So perhaps I know a priori that
I believe that 7 + 5 = 12. If so, then I have a priori knowledge of a
contingent truth.( Plantinga 8)
It is interesting to note in connection with this point that when Trapp
applies epistemic logic in representing the Cogito Argument he ends up
with "I* believe I* think, therefore I* know I* exist* (where the asterisk
represents the transcendental sense of these terms). It is probable that
Descartes's belief that he thinks is precisely the sort Plantinga has in
Transcendental Interpretation 9
mind as suitable for categorization as a priori contingent. From this
a priori contingent truth results another: that I know I exist. Hence
Plantinga writes:
Similarly, perhaps my knowledge that I exist is a priori. For perhaps
I know a priori that 1 believe that I exist; I also know a priori that if I
believe that I exist, then indeed I do exist. But then nothing but
exceptional obtuseness could prevent my knowing a priori that I
exist, despite the contingency of that proposition.( 8)
This is one way in which "cogito, ergo sum," or the observation that "this
proposition: I am, I exist, is necessarily true each time that I pronoimce
it, or that I mentally conceive it," can be considered as a priori but
contingent.
As for the possibility of a posteriori necessity, Saul Kripke, in
Naming and Necessity, challenges the notion that necessary truths are
always a priori. He gives the example of a mathematical theory called the
Goldbach Conjecture, which tells us that an even number greater than 2
will be the sum of two prime numbers. Since this has not been proved
mathematically, we do not know whether it is true or false, but we do
know that if it is true, it is necessarily true, while if it false, it is neces
sarily false. However, in the absence of a proof, it does not follow (from
the fact that it is necessary) that we know anything a priori about it, or
even that we could theoretically know anything a priori about it (Kripke
36-37). This is a possible example of non-a priori necessity. Kripke also
gives us an idea of what a posteriori necessity might be:
AH the cases of the necessary a posteriori advocated in the text have
the special character attributed to mathematical statements: Philo
sophical analysis tells us that they cannot be contingently true, so
any empirical knowledge of their truth is automatically empirical
knowledge that they are necessary.( 159)
Could the Cogito Argument be a candidate for a posteriori neces
sity? An interesting support for the idea that the necessity of the Cogito
Argument is a posteriori is Descartes's statement, cited above, that his
existence is recognized "by a simple act of mental vision ... as if it were
a thing that is known per se"( HR II, Reply to Objections II, 38). Frankfurt
brings up a question about this passage: If one wishes to construe
Descartes's "simple act of mental vision" as a means by which the
evidence of "sum" is intuitively grasped, "then why does Descartes say
10 Therese Foote
that he recognizes existence only as if it were a thing known per se? If
sum were intuited as self-evident, it would be known per se and not just
as if" (338). The fact that sum is not recognized as a thing known per se
might indicate that it is neither an a priori, analytic, necessary truth, nor
merely a self-evident contingent fact; that it is recognized "as if it were a
thing that is known per se" lends some credence, Frankfurt endeavors to
show, to the idea that "cogito, ergo sum" is indeed a type of inference. In
the first part of this paper, I argued that such an inference would be
transcendental and necessary. The fact that sum is not recognized imme
diately as a thing known per se might also indicate that while it is recog
nized as necessary, this is so only after Descartes has experienced
thought. After the experience of thinking, Descartes recognizes that the
experience itself necessitates the transcendental ego, and thus he makes
the transcendental inference by grasping that "I think, therefore I am"
must necessarily be true. Since this truth can ordy be recognized after or
in experience, it is clearly a posteriori; and yet the inference is necessary.
In fact, the very idea of a transcendental logic seems to necessitate
a posteriori necessity.
This I take to be the solution of the mystery surroimding Des-
cartes's use of the term "necessarily." The trar\scendental interpretation
of the Cogito Argument is the only one that makes it obvious why
Descartes called its truth "necessary" after doubting a priori necessary
truths. It is of relevance to Cartesian scholarship that the "special char
acter" of the necessary truth in the Cogito Argument is that it is fl post
eriori; and it is relevant to the field of philosophical logic to discover that
Descartes's Cogito Argument evinces a posteriori necessity par excellence.
IV.
A few questions still remain. What is the ultimate utility of this
a posteriori necessary truth in Descartes's philosophical system? And
what does it mean that the Cogito Argument can also be interpreted as
an a priori contingent truth?
A posteriori-necessaiy/a priori-contingent truth plays similar roles
in the philosophies of Kant and Descartes. T. K. Swing writes in the
preface to his book Kant's Transcendental Logic:
I have argued that Kant calls his material logic transcendental logic
chiefly because he intends it to be the logic of transcendence, that
is, the material logic that enables the Cartesian subject to transcend
its subjectivity and attain objective knowledge. Descartes himself
Transcendental Interpretation 11
practically assumed the necessity of such a logic of transcendence
(the logic of clear and distinct ideas) throughout his Meditations
and even made some fragmentary attempts to construct one in his
Discourse on Method,( viii)
Swing paraphrases a Leibnizian observation: "apperception (self-
recognition) is never possible in the domain of perceptions and . . .
becomes possible only in the domain of necessary truths/'^ Swing adds,
"We can never encounter in the domain of perceptions what is other than
ourselves" (347). Descartes is effective in showing that he cannot doubt
that he exists, but, of course, anyone's existence is contingent. The
analysis of "cogito, ergo sum" in this paper indicated that if it is necessary,
it is nevertheless a posteriori; and to be considered a priori, it also has to be
considered contingent. Although one cannot doubt one's existence, to
assert that one exists in reality is still a synthetic proposition. The
Bedingung der Moglichkeit will never be more than a presupposition, albeit
a necessary one, and the trarrscendental ego by its very nature can never
be perceived. So while Descartes, as Kant would do in his turn, recog
nized that his inability to doubt his existence indicated that there were
certain rules that the understanding was never without, and proceeded
to construct a philosophy based upon clear and distinct ideas, the recog-
rution is also implicit in his philosophy that what transcends experience
cannot be known. Implicit in Cartesian certainty is Kant's later denial of
knowledge to make room for faith.
Descartes infers his own existence as a presupposition of the possi
bility of experience and then posits God's existence as a presupposition
of his own existence. In accordance with the rules of clear and distinct
logic that have been discovered, Descartes cannot think of his being, as a
res cogitans, except as being contingent upon some other, ultimately
necessary, being, who is also the one who implanted clear and distinct
ideas in him. This ultimate transcendent source he infers with even more
certainty than the transcendental source. "I conclude so certainly that
God exists, and that my existence depends entirely on Him in every
moment of my life—that I do not think the human mind is capable of
knowing anything with more evidence and certitude" {Meditations, HR 1171;
my emphasis). However, the fact that Descartes recognizes the contin
gency of his existence upon God suggests that he would acknowledge
the transcendent as essentially divorced from experience. He cannot
^The reference is to The Monadology 28,29, and 30.
12 Therese Foote
know anything with more certitude than that there is some transcendent
source of his experience, but this is not to say that he knows that tran
scendent source, or even that it is with absolute (i.e., objective) certainty.
The utility of the necessity of "cogito, ergo sum" is that it paves the
way for subjective certainty by establishing a logic of clear and distinct
ideas; but the fact that it can also be construed as a priori contingent is
useful because it preserves objective freedom. As Swing puts it.
The necessary truths that are produced by the compulsory imposi
tion of the categories on the objects may provide the subjective
certainty but can never secure the knowledge of objects as they are
in themselves. Kant himself admits the impossibility of knowing
the objects in and for themselves. Human reason, which must
impose the same set of categories on all objects, is the slave of its
own autocratic rule; such an autocratic reason can gain subjective
certainty only by forfeiting the possibility of attaining objective
truths.( 360)
Since Descartes laid all the emphasis upon the subjective certainty he
managed to obtain, it took a Kant to make explicit what the Cogito
Argument had achieved, namely, the denial of knowledge in order to
make room for faith.
In a letter to Mesland,2 May 1644, Descartes wrote:
Though God has willed that certain truths were necessary, that
is not to say that he has willed them necessarily. For to will
that they be necessary and to will necessarily, or to be necessitated
to will them, are completely different. (As cited in Alanen and
Knuuttila; AT IV 118)
Descartes wiU not impose his own human notions of necessity on God.
Perhaps there is more humility in Cartesian certainty than we recog
nized before. Perhaps previous scholarship has been somewhat unchari
table to Descartes by assuming that he either stayed within the limits of
traditional categories like a priori necessity or depended upon a meta
physical faith that performative utterances imply existence. A Ccireful
examination of his use of the term "necessarily" informs us of the possi
bility of "hybrid" categories like a posteriori necessity and a priori contin
gency, yielding new ideas for contemporary philosophical logic about
what necessity can be.
Transcendental Interpratation 13
Works Cited
Alanen, Lilli, and Simo Knuuttila. "The Foundations of Modality and
Conceivability in Descartes and His Predecessors." Modern
Modalities. Ed. S. Knuuttila. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1988.1-70.
Descartes, Rene. CEvres de Descartes. Ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery.
3 vols. Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1969-1971.
. The Philosophical Works of Descartes. Trans. Elizabeth S. Haldane and
G. R. T. Ross. 2 vols. Mineola, NY: Dover, 1955.
Frankfurt, Harry G. "Descartes' Discussion of His Existence in the
Second Meditation." Philosophical Review 75( 1966): 329-56.
Grayling, A. C. An Introduction to Philosophical Logic. Totowa, NJ: Barnes
and Noble, 1982.
Hintikka, Jaakko. "Cogito, Ergo Sum: Inference or Performance?" Philo
sophical Review 71 (1962): 3-32.
Kant, Immanuel. Immanuel Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Norman
Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan, 1965.
Kripke, Saul A. Naming and Necessity. Cambridge: Harvard UP,1 980.
Plantinga, Alvin. The Nature of Necessity. Oxford: Clarendon, 1974.
Swing, Thomas Kaehao. "The Dialogues of Transcendence." Kant's
Transcendental Logic. New Haven: Yale UP,1 969. 334-70.
Trapp, Rainer. "'Credo* Me* Cogitare Ergo Scio* Me* Essei/2'—
Descartes' 'Cogito Ergo Sum' Reinterpreted." Erkenntnis 29
(1988): 253-67.