Aporia vol. 19 no. 2—2009
Liberty and Debt
Tom Fournier
The libertarian conception of negative freedom most accurately
embodies the meaning of human freedom and holds moral primacy
over other conceptions. Yet libertarianism is morally incomplete. To
become wholly legitimate, the libertarian claim must simultaneously recog-
nize the moral sway of society’s less-strong claim regarding the indebtedness
of individuals. My goal here is to illuminate a significant moral deficiency
in the libertarian conception and to point to the associated missing piece.
Precisely how libertarianism and its missing piece are to be joined is left for
another (longer) writing.
To show this deficiency, I will first present an overview of the distinc-
tion between positive and negative freedom conceptions, inclusive of four
sub-distinctions: non-interference, non-domination, collective rule, and
autonomy. I will then show some skeletal argument supporting the nega-
tive freedom conception in its libertarian form. I will finally make the case
for moral incompleteness, using a somewhat novel approach to the original
position of human cooperation.
The Positive-Negative Distinction
Non-Interference
Negative freedom may be thought of as freedom from manmade obsta-
cles or interferences (Berlin 2–3). This aspect of the negative conception
Tom Fournier is a senior majoring in philosophy at the University of Arizona. He
has a prior BA in business administration and has worked a number of years in the
management of technology businesses related to pollution measurement. His current
interests are political and moral philosophy as well as philosophy of science. He
plans to pursue graduate studies in philosophy.
56 Tom Fournier
is also described by Charles Taylor as relying on an opportunity-concept
whereby to be free is to have opportunity open to pursuit (144). The cham-
pions of negative freedom seek to reduce interference with individual
choices, including interference created by society, governments, institu-
tions, corporations, or other individuals.
In general, the negative conception of freedom is not concerned with
helping individuals overcome personal limitations that are normal (e.g.,
lacking talent to sing) or even aberrant (e.g., emotional incapacities due to
social class or upbringing). When viewed from the individual’s perspective,
negative freedom is all about “leave me alone to do as I please,” and it car-
ries a moral claim centered squarely on the rights of the individual.
In its pure, non-interference form, negative freedom is epitomized
by Robert Nozick’s 1974 book, Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Following the
Kantian principle that individuals are ends in themselves and not merely
means to the ends of government, Nozick proposes that individual rights
have the status of inviolable side constraints to any governmental action
(28–35). He seeks to discredit the notion that government is here to work
toward a goal of minimizing rights violations. Instead, non-violation of
rights is seen as a mandatory side constraint that governments may not
trespass on their way to any goal whatsoever. Additionally, in Nozick’s view,
government goals should encompass little more than protection of the citi-
zenry against invasion, crime, and fraud. Therefore, small government is
conducive to libertarian negative freedom.
In short, an advocate of non-interference will claim that individu-
als are unfree if society, governments, organizations, or other individuals
obstruct or interfere with individual pursuits, unless those pursuits are
unfairly trampling the equal rights of others.
Non-Domination
Philip Pettit champions a further distinction within the negative free-
dom conception, which he labels “liberty as non-domination,” and with it
he takes a modest step away from the notion of absolute non-interference
(51). When defining non-domination, Pettit points out two additional cri-
teria in need of consideration—one tends to increase the scope of what may
be considered unfree, while the other decreases the scope.
The first has to do with capacity to interfere. Under Pettit’s observa-
tion, the capacity to interfere with an individual’s freedom is as detrimental
to freedom as the actual interference would be. For example, a citizen in an
all-powerful but historically benevolent monarchy is subject to the whim of
the monarch. He could be said to be unfree because the monarch’s ability
LiberTy and debT 57
to interfere (and punish) affects the citizen’s choices and is therefore as
debilitating as actual interference. Therefore, the scope of “unfree” under
the non-domination view is widened to include potential as well as
actual interference.
Moving in the other direction, Pettit claims that arbitrariness is a
prerequisite to labeling certain interferences as true obstacles to freedom.
Whereas an advocate of the non-interference conception would claim that
any interference other than liberty protections makes us less free, an advo-
cate of non-domination does not see restrictive or coercive laws as limiting
freedom, provided such laws are formed under legitimate collective rule
and implemented in concert with rights to fair appeal. For example, a judge
who fines a citizen for withholding partial payment of income tax in protest
against government spending on bank bailouts is not interfering with the
citizen’s freedom because the judge’s action is not arbitrary. It is authorized
by law that stems from legitimate collective rule even though it forcibly
takes money for a cause that the citizen abhors. In this respect, the scope
of “unfree” under non-domination is narrowed to only include arbitrary
interferences.
In summary, the non-domination variety of negative freedom holds,
unlike the purely obstacle-driven notion of libertarian non-interference,
that the potential for interference is to be included in the mix of obstacles
to freedom, whereas lawfully authorized non-arbitrary interferences are
not. As pointed out by Jacob Levy, the non-domination concept of nega-
tive freedom is thought of as combining with the collective rule concept
of positive freedom (discussion to follow) to form the current notion of
Republicanism (Levy).
Collective Rule
Just as the negative freedom conception is championed in two variet-
ies (i.e., pure non-interference vs. non-domination), the positive freedom
conception is also thought of as having two varieties: collective rule and
individual autonomy.
In contrast to the freedom-from mantra of the negative conception,
the positive freedom advocate sees freedom inclusive of a large freedom-to
component. Under the freedom-to component, strong emphasis is placed
on freedom to have a say in government, i.e., political participation via
collective rule. As explored by Benjamin Constant, this particular feature
of the positive freedom conception dates back to the ancient societies of
Rome, Sparta, Athens, Gaul, and others (Constant 1–2). In these ancient
embodiments, the notion of freedom to participate in governance often
58 Tom Fournier
had little connection to the idea of personal liberty in private life. Freedom
entailed little more than having the status of citizen (as opposed to slave)
and therefore having some say in governance. Individual rights in private
life were not seriously in play as foundational principles of governance until
the eighteenth century hosted the American and French revolutions. In
Constant’s words, “the aim of the ancients was the sharing of social power
among the citizens of the same fatherland; this is what they called
liberty” (5).
Just as “opportunity-concept” is sometimes used to characterize nega-
tive freedom, “exercise-concept” is sometimes used to characterize positive
freedom. In modern times, “exercise-concept” is often applied well beyond
the exercise of voice in governance. Charles Taylor illuminates the concep-
tual link between positive freedom and realms beyond collective rule: “The
view that freedom involves at least partially collective self-rule is essentially
grounded on an exercise-concept. For this view (at least partly) identifies
freedom with self-direction, i.e., the actual exercise of directing control over
one’s life” (144, my italics). In other words, the early idea of individuals hav-
ing a say in government is a good thing because it is a form (albeit diluted)
of self-direction.
Autonomy
In modern times, the notion of self-direction has been extended to
include directing control over one’s life in general. The modern liberal sense
of positive freedom encompasses the notions of capacity for action and self-
mastery; that is, freedom is autonomy-based. If society and government are
to be deemed protectors of freedom, they are no longer responsible only
for non-interference with the citizenry. They are also to assume an enabler
role, and this enabler role conflicts with the idea of non-interference.
One consequence of accepting the positive freedom conception is
sharing in the moral claim over individuals’ lives. Under the negative con-
ception, the individual has a sovereign moral claim to inviolable rights to
choose whatever course of action pleases him or leads to fulfillment of
her life goals (while not infringing on the equal rights of others). In con-
trast, under the positive freedom conception, society and government bear
at least some responsibility for enabling the individual to realize auton-
omy (and therefore to succeed in the pursuit of goals). This could be as
innocuous (by some standards) as the provision of public education for
youth. However, on some counts it extends much further into the realm
of paternalism, e.g., banning use of drugs, mandating use of seat belts, or
forbidding pornography.
LiberTy and debT 59
In short, a modern liberal positive freedom advocate will claim an
individual is unfree if society and/or government fail to provide meaning-
ful opportunities and fail to assist the individual in obtaining the requisite
autonomy to pursue those opportunities.
Below I have provided, in tabular form, a rough sketch of the nega-
tive-positive distinctions presented thus far.
Table 1: Negative-Positive Distinction — Summary Sketch
Negative Freedom Positive Freedom
Catch Phrase “Freedom from” “Freedom to”
Generalized Concept Opportunity–Concept Exercize–Concept
Societal Emphasis Non–interference Provision of Enablers
Individual Emphasis “Leave me alone” “Help me out”
Obstacle Sources Outside of Individual Both Inside and Outside
Sources of Moral Claim The Individual The Individual and
Society
Political Concern Small Government Collective Rule
Individual Unfree If Government, society or Individual lacks capacity
other individuals obstruct for action, autonomy or
actions or pursuits self–mastery
A further summarization of the sub-varieties of negative and positive
freedom is given in the next table. These sub-varieties are identified with
the political concerns of the groups mentioned above. The table uses a
notion of Republicanism held by Jacob Levy, inclusive of both collective
rule and non-domination (Levy). I include a further distinction between
modern and ancient republicanism since the ancients seem to have been
less concerned about issues of domination.
60 Tom Fournier
Table 2: Political Concerns
Negative Freedom Positive Freedom
Approximate Non– Non– Collective Individual
Affiliation Interference Domination Rule Autonomy
Modern X
Libertarian
Modern X X
Republican
Ancient X
Republican
Modern X X
Liberal
Negative Freedom’s Moral Claim
In my view, the negative freedom conception in its non-interference
form has the strongest moral claim. I will not attempt to construct an entire
fortress of argumentation in defense of this view because my primary goal
is to explore negative freedom’s greatest drawback: debt blindness. In lieu
of the whole fortress, I will instead describe and defend only the flag flying
above it: The position that the meaning and value of human life is founded in
the act of choice and experience of subsequent consequence.
As I see it, this flag is the primary claim of importance in favor of the
libertarian view. Nozick illustrated the nature of this claim via his thought
experiment: “the experience machine” (42–5). This thought experiment
asks the reader to imagine a machine that can generate any series of experi-
ences with absolute fidelity so as to be completely indistinguishable from
the real world. The occupant specifies the experiences she wishes. These
may include any level of success, reward, and excitement—be it through
friendships, love, power, wealth, adventure, etc. The occupant then under-
goes those experiences via the machine, taking time out every two years to
re-specify what she would like for her next string of experiences.
Upon reflection, most of us would conclude that the experience
machine, if it were possible, would be unattractive as a complete substitute
for life. Few people would elect to spend more than a vacation week or two
in the machine, yet alone two years of life. But why? The temptation is to
shrug and exclaim, “It’s not real!” Yet, you—in the machine—would still
be the ‘real’ you. What seems so bad about the real you having a bunch of
fantastic but fabricated experiences over an extended portion of your life?
LiberTy and debT 61
The bad thing, it seems, is the lack of real consequences resulting from
important self-made choices. The choices you make while in the machine
would be of no consequence since the important part of the outcome has
already been specified. This observation points to a primal feature of the
self: choosing in the face of real consequence is the very being and becoming of
self. We both define and make ourselves via our choices—be they reactive
to experiences or proactive, seeking out certain experiences. These choices
are driven not only by wishes or desires to experience certain things, but
also by second-order wishes or desires to be a certain way; that is, to want to
want certain things or experiences or personal attributes. These important
choices (both first- and second-order motivated) are made in the context
of a real world that will resist—a world that must be overcome or at
least negotiated.
I am saying that the very meaning of our lives is embodied in the
choices we make. Everything that denies us the opportunity to choose takes
away some portion of meaning from our lives, some portion of our self.
None of us are meant to be robots, slaves, serfs, or subjects. Our moral
claim to life is a claim to choice. Therefore, if our individual right to life
has primacy over all other rights (and I think it does), then so too does our
right to choose. For this reason, the positive freedom claims of freedom as
autonomy or freedom as collective will, and even the negative freedom
claim of freedom as non-domination, must all occupy a place of secondary
importance to freedom as non-interference because each of these other
types of freedom gain their distinction by demanding some ground belong-
ing to our freedom to choose.
Freedom as non-domination allows for certain types of interference
sanctioned by laws rooted in collective rule. Thus, the government, through
the collective will of society, is given the role of arbiter over what shall be
deemed free or unfree (albeit in the spirit of making persons feel free). As
Pettit points out, and I agree, this is a demanding and perhaps unrealistic
expectation of government (77). Capacities for and definitions of freedom
vary with the individual. We ought not to expect that institutions can suc-
cessfully account for these variations while reliably avoiding domination
of some segments of the population. If freedom of the individual is the
goal, then resolving to avoid violations of individual rights as a manda-
tory constraint to government action is the most direct path to success.
Such a mandatory constraint is the core of libertarianism and freedom
as non-interference.
Freedom seen purely as collective rule is worse still than non-domina-
tion. Collective rule can and sometimes does oppress the minority and take
away freedom to choose. This could take the form of demanding labor via
tax dollars to support things one would not choose to support voluntarily,
62 Tom Fournier
or it could take the form of collective rule that elects representatives who
pass laws limiting the freedom of minorities (e.g., the Southern U.S. “Jim
Crow” laws of the not-too-distant past).
Freedom as autonomy carries its own special brand of dehumanizing
potential in that it allows for government and society to second-guess indi-
viduals regarding choices they make over their own lives. Though done in
the name of the individual’s own interest, this second-guessing is nonethe-
less a restriction on free choice and directly interferes with the individual’s
wishes and being. It also carries with it a collateral impingement on the
freedom of those who are required to support such government programs
through tax dollars.
The above arguments in favor of freedom as non-interference are
very rough sketches of well-worn arguments delivered by others with con-
siderably more finesse. My goal in presenting them is to stake out the core
tenant of my own view and encourage the reader to consider the moral
claim both you and I have in regard to our own lives and, by equivalence,
our life choices: liberty is our birthright.
Yet the story does not end here with me insisting that liberty is all
that matters. It is not. A portion of the positive freedom conception still
holds sway, even in the face of our greater claim to individual liberty. That
portion has nothing to do with modern issues of citizens with impaired
autonomy, nor does it relate to inequality of opportunity or holdings. Its
foundation rests, in my view, on the origin of law itself.
Positive Freedom Holds Some Sway
Some portion of the intent behind positive freedom advocacy ought
to have some sway with libertarianism. To see why, consider the origin of
law. Many who have written about freedom look to the original position
of human cooperation for explanation or justification of favored political
theories, (e.g., Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, Hume, Rawls, Nozick). In some
cases the original position is treated as an entirely contrived scenario for
the purpose of studying how political theories might reasonably be justi-
fied (e.g., Rawls’ “veil of ignorance”). In other cases thinkers speculatively
extrapolate backwards in time to prehistory with an eye to determine what
mankind may have been thinking when transitioning from a state of nature
to a state of governance. Hobbes, Locke, and Hume exemplify such extrapo-
lation, though they each come to distinctly different conclusions regarding
what the prehistory transition from nature to civilization was like and why
it occurred. My purpose is not to examine the distinction between their
approaches and conclusions, but instead to point out that in each case they
LiberTy and debT 63
place considerable emphasis on the origins of government as rooted in the
need for man to protect himself from his fellow men. My issue is with
that emphasis.
On the surface it seems reasonable to start in the present, taking
inventory of all the services performed by modern government. Then mov-
ing back in time, but still within the period of written history, we see the
sophistication of government services falling away. As the clock moves
backwards, various features of government disappear—transportation reg-
ulation, financial regulation, social security programs, etc. When we go
back far enough in time, the residual features of government are military
defense (or conquest) and dispute resolution (i.e., civil law). From there, it
seems plausible to reason that if our earliest records indicate that the func-
tion of the first governments was primarily to protect men from other men
(either nation-from-nation or citizen-from-citizen), then the origin of law
and government must have been the perceived need for such protection.
Therefore, acquiescence to that perceived need is the likely marker between
state-of-nature and civilization.
However, I think the above reasoning is in error. By starting in the
present and reasoning backward in time, our speculative extrapolation is
pre-loaded with modern biases. Since we are dealing entirely with conjecture
anyway, we could instead begin with the state of nature in the very distant
past and reason forward—asking why any two of our ancestors would decide
to live together in the first place instead of foraging alone. Perhaps the easi-
est answers to imagine involve mothers with babies. Mothers instinctually
protect their offspring by living with, feeding, and caring for them. We can
imagine our male ancestors as being interested in these young mothers for
reproductive reasons as evidenced by the babies having come into existence.
We can further suppose that the occasional male would recognize reasons
to live with mother and baby (e.g., availability of sex, sharing body warmth
at night, or having a partner to help scare off predators). Some of these
recognized reasons could be instinctual and some learned by experience.
From this prototypical example of a far-distant ancestral family, we
can hypothesize that some offspring come into contact with outsiders and
mate. Some of the mates join the group and the family becomes a tribe.
Survival enhancement was its bond and social cooperation its lubricant.
I am proposing that the earliest social cooperation is best understood
as a means to enhance comfort and survival. If this is the case, it was largely
instinctual with perhaps a vague sense of anticipated or expected reciproca-
tion mixed in. On this view, it is highly unlikely that social cooperation was
conceived of and acted on as a means to ensure or enhance liberty. You
may argue that the current topic is supposed to be the origin of law and
government, not the origin of social cooperation. My reply is that these
64 Tom Fournier
two are not at all distinct. There is a grayscale between social cooperation
and governance, beginning with the first tacit understanding of mutual expec-
tations arising out of early cooperation. Long before our ancestors could
write it down, tribes had social cooperation in place, and that cooperation
involved at least some rudimentary shared idea of expected reciproca-
tion among members of the tribe. This was not government, nor was it law.
However, it seems clear that shared ideas of expected reciprocation among
tribe members are the foundational precursors to law.
Was this a kind of consent? Yes. But it was not the kind of consent
imagined in social contract theory whereby an individual trades certain
freedoms and rights in return for protection by a ruler. It was consent to
trade favors according to vaguely shared ideas of reciprocation within a
tribe. This was the foundational behavior that, with the development of
greater social reasoning capabilities, was the stepping stone to first law.
We may argue about how far back into our pre-history these behaviors
occurred;1 however, it seems clear that they would have both predated and
inspired the invention of law.
Thus far I have concluded that the formation of the idea of law more
likely had its roots in shared ideas of expected reciprocation among groups
1 Imagine some point in our far-distant ancestral past when shared ideas of expected reciproca-
tion first became tribal norms of behavior. We may well wonder how much time elapsed from that
development until our ancestors took the next big step of transforming those cooperative behav-
ioral norms into law. That step, I suspect, was a long way off in time–because the ancestral tribe I
have described here were likely apes.
If you are squinting (or perhaps smirking), I hope it is out of amusement as opposed to incredu-
lity. Assuming the latter—we can look to primates for signs as to what humans were like before we
tamed ourselves. In a scholarly paper titled “‘Any Animal Whatever’ Darwinian Building Blocks of
Morality in Monkeys and Apes,” psychobiology researchers noted what could believably be viewed
as moralistic behavior in primate societies (Flack, et al). Their research involved extended observa-
tions of social interaction within primate groups. It is no surprise that the researchers reported
displays of raw anger by primate individuals toward aggressive behavior from other primate indi-
viduals. The interesting part is that the members throughout some primate groups also displayed
moralistic aggression against members of their group who had violated apparent social codes of
reciprocity. For weaker individuals, this aggression took the form of protest against the perpetrator,
and for stronger individuals, it took the form of punishment against the perpetrator. In some cases
these behaviors even led to a time-extended spiral of counter retaliations between the punished
and the punisher: monkey feuds!
My interest here is in the apparent existence of shared ideas of expected reciprocation among the
primate group members. Of course, this is interesting only if one presumes, as I do, that Darwin
was correct and humans evolved from primates over some period in the very distant past. This
makes it seem plausible and perhaps even likely that the first steps toward creation of law were
taken before we were even human. It also calls into question the state-of-nature speculations that
view the source of government as rooted first in warring humans.
So as not to be misunderstood, I am not claiming that law or government predates humanity.
Nor am I claiming that we have anything close to proof regarding the motivations behind the earli-
est cooperation between our ancestors. I am using the observable social behaviors of our genetic
ancestors to influence a speculative model of how we came about the notion of law.
LiberTy and debT 65
of individuals that live together. I see the significance of this conclusion,
if correct, as follows:
First, the source of law and therefore governance was not a quest for
freedom, but instead an outgrowth of cooperative reciprocation.
Second, the state-of-nature scenarios that place emphasis on a man-
fighting-man origin of governance overlook the practical need for shared
ideas of expected reciprocation to exist within the tribe before the fight-
ing (in a social context) can even start. Prior to the existence of a social
context, fighting between one hominid and another carries no more signifi-
cance regarding freedom than fighting between a hominid and any other
of nature’s animals. That large males brutally dominated prehistory tribes
once a social context existed was an unavoidable consequence of group life.
But it was not the source or reason for law. The source was shared ideas of
expected reciprocation. The large males were the best at demanding recip-
rocation from others and enforcing reciprocation on behalf of others, such
enforcement itself being performed in expectation of favors returned. But
the precursors to law (the shared ideas) had their own source in coopera-
tion and reciprocity, and those sources were motivated by a desire to ensure
survival and enhance comfort.
Third, at the soonest, the idea of freedom in its negative, non-interfer-
ence sense came after the existence of tribal cooperation and shared ideas
of expected reciprocity. Due to the greater mental sophistication needed
to hold the idea of civil freedom, it seems likely that such an idea came into
being after law and governance had evolved from the more vague notion
of expected reciprocity.
Fourth, reciprocity began as a mirrored moral claim (i.e., a cross-
claim) between individuals participating in the cooperative exchange.
Fifth, at the point when matching ideas of expected reciprocity
became shared throughout the tribe and the tribe began enforcing those
ideas jointly, the moral claim was expanded to include a cross-claim between
the individual and the group. The group now had a claim on the individual.
That group claim rightfully concerns positive freedom conceptions and existed
before the idea of negative freedom had been born.
Therefore, the portion of the positive freedom conception that worries
about what individuals may owe society seems to have a moral foundation
dating back to the tribal beginnings of humans. As I write these words I
imagine a troop of our distant ancestors huddled under a rock overhang on
a cold, rainy night, sharing body heat to stay alive—each having a sense that
their survival was dependent upon the existence of the group. To be sure,
that sense was part instinct in a deep, visceral way—brought on by the stark
contrast between the body heat of the group and the penetrating cold of
the night. However, at some point in our history, that sense of dependent
66 Tom Fournier
survival transcended mere instinct and took on a less-vague form—the form
of an idea: indebtedness.
That same indebtedness holds sway today. In modern times the meta-
phorical body heat of the group has so overwhelmed our experience of the
world that we can barely feel the cold of the night. Few of us in Western,
free-enterprise democracies believe we are in any real danger of starving,
freezing, or being eaten by an animal. Unless we give pause to consider
it, we are unaware of the indebtedness we have to modern society for our
safety and comfort, let alone our very existence. Those of us who live in
free-enterprise democracies wander through a forest of opportunities while
breathing liberty. Our worries have nothing to do with starving or freezing:
they have more to do with picking the right opportunity and obsessing
over whether someone else has more. That we each have a debt to society
is evidenced by the stark difference between the worries we have today and
the worries our distant ancestors had. My point is not that the advocates
of positive freedom are correct. They are not. Freedom should not be mea-
sured by the autonomy of individuals—it should be measured by the lack
of obstacles from government, society, and other humans. As individuals,
we have a moral claim to this freedom because choosing among opportu-
nities and experiencing the consequences is what gives meaning to our
lives. What I am saying about the positive freedom conception is that a
portion of its intent has moral sway: the portion that recognizes the need
for reciprocity in the quest to enhance comfort and happiness in our lives,
not the portion that seeks equality of goods for all, nor the portion that
seeks to drive all humans to some standard of autonomy or some notion
of human perfection.
Conclusion
My goal in this writing has been to assert that even while holding the
superior claim, a libertarian conception of negative freedom founded on
the moral claim of primacy of individual rights suffers from a significant
moral deficiency. There is no error of cogency in libertarianism. There is
an error of completeness—a missing piece. Libertarianism fails to recog-
nize the moral sway of the weaker claim regarding the individual’s initial
debt to society. I am asserting that this indebtedness supports at least
some of the goal of positive freedom advocates while still denying their
conception of freedom as state-induced autonomy, state-induced happi-
ness, or state-induced moral perfection. I have left open the question of
how the individual ought to pay back society. The orthodox libertarian
may worry that this open question of debt leaves room for the positive
LiberTy and debT 67
freedom advocate to assert that the state has a moral claim for taxation
above the threshold required to support protective services in a Nozickian
minimal state. I do not cringe at the notion of paying some tax to support
some social programs beyond the minimal state required for protection.
However, I do cringe at the motives of those who would stick a lever in
that crack and pry it open to target a character perfectionist goal or an
egalitarian move to homogeneity in holdings. To me, such goals represent
an untenable loss of freedom akin to medieval bloodletting in the name of
saving a patient. Freedom in the negative sense of non-interference is our
birth right. Yet we all carry a birth debt owed to the society that enabled
our moral claim to freedom. One of the most meaningful choices we can
make as individuals is how to repay that debt. Perhaps that is just where it
ought to be left—our choice.
Acknowledgements: I am indebted to Bas van der
Vossen for advice and corrections on an early draft of
this paper as well as to the editorial staff at Aporia
for substantive and helpful editorial suggestions on
later versions.
Works Cited
Aristotle. Politics, “Book One.” Trans. Benjamin Jowett, <http://www.
constitution.org/ari/polit_00.htm>.
Berlin, Isaiah. “Two Concepts of Liberty.” Four Essays on Liberty, New
York: Oxford UP, 1969.
Constant, Benjamin. The Liberty of the Ancients Compared with that of Moderns.
1816. <http://www.uark.edu/depts/comminfo/cambridge/ancients.
html>.
Flack, Jessica C., Frans B.M. de Wall. “‘Any Animal Whatever’ Darwinian
Building Blocks of Morality in Monkeys and Apes.” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 7.1 Imprint Academic (2000).
Dworkin, Gerald. “The Nature of Autonomy.” The Theory and Practice of
Autonomy, 1988. 3–20.
———.“The Value of Autonomy.” The Theory and Practice of Autonomy,
1988. 21–33.
Gray, John. “On Negative and Positive Liberty.” Liberalisms: Essays in
Political Philosophy, London, Routledge, 1989. 45–68.
Hobbes, Thomas. The Leviathan. 1660. <http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/
phl302/texts/hobbes/leviathan-contents.html>.
Hume, David. Of the Original Contract. 1748. <http://www.constitution.
org/dh/origcont.htm>.
Levy, Jacob. Lecture Notes. University of Arizona. 13 February 2009.
Locke, John. Two Treatises of Government. 1689. <http://etext.lib.virginia.
edu/toc/modeng/public/LocTre2.html>.
Nozick, Robert. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York, Basic Books, Inc.,
1974.
Pettit, Philip. “Liberty as Non-domination.” Republicanism, 1997, 51–79.
Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1971.
Taylor, Charles. “What’s Wrong with Negative Liberty.” The Idea of
Freedom. Ed. A. Ryan. New York: Oxford UP, 1979.