Aporia vol. 21 no. 1—2011
The Hierarchy of Empirical Defeasibility
Bryce Gessell
The last fifty years have seen an explosion in the depth of episte-
mological inquiry, and even a glance at the literature reveals an
extensive variety of –isms. This flood of scholarship has come partly
as a response to Gettier’s 1963 salvo, which awoke epistemology from the
“dogmatic slumber” of justified true belief. Gettier showed that the tradi-
tional justified true belief analysis of knowledge was not adequate in many
common cases; since that time philosophers have expended immense ef-
fort in trying to assemble a tenable analysis of knowledge, but the resulting
epicycles have made frustratingly little headway.
Symptomatic of this standstill is the brief lifespan of many epistemic
analyses, which are meant to be comprehensive theories but most often
devolve into general epistemological concepts. New theories of knowledge
depending on causality, reliability, defeasibility, and other concepts at-
tempted to answer Gettier, but none really proved sufficient.1 While none
of these theories won the day entirely, philosophers realized their utility
and incorporated them into the body of generally accepted epistemological
concepts. We can therefore speak of the causal ancestry of a belief without
committing ourselves to a causal theory of knowledge, or of the reliability
of a belief-producing process without professing reliabilism. While they did
1 While I realize that these theories still have adherents and defenders, my argument is that they
are not sufficiently unproblematic as to convince the majority of philosophers to accept them as
a final analysis.
Bryce Gessell is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University. His
philosophical interests include epistemology, Plato and Aristotle, and the philosophy
of cognitive science. He will be applying to philosophy PhD programs in fall 2011.
This essay placed second in the 2011 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
26 Bryce Gessell
not fully analyze knowledge, these theories identified important, previously
unnoticed epistemic concepts.
However, even these concepts require significant clarification before
they can be marshaled in an argument. In this paper, I propose to discuss
the relationship between perceptually justified beliefs and defeasibility. Be-
fore I do, however, I must clarify the senses in which I use the terms “defea-
sibility” and “perceptually justified,” because the strength and importance
of my argument depend on the way in which I use these concepts.
Though defeasibility is in fact a single concept, we can speak of it in
two main ways. The first is as part of a theory of knowledge. Such theories
usually analyze knowledge as a conjunction of justified true belief and some
defeasibility condition. The second way is as a general concept, neutral
toward competing analyses of knowledge. I intend to use defeasibility in
the second sense. I thus construe defeasibility as the concept according
to which one justified belief can be defeated by another justified belief.
Defeaters are either overriding or undermining. An overriding defeater for a
justified belief P is a justified belief that not-P. An undermining defeater
for a belief P is a justified belief that the source of the justification for P
is defective.2 I take this definition and the claim that defeasibility can be
a general epistemological concept to be relatively noncontroversial, and I
make no move to argue that the correct analysis of knowledge involves
defeasibility.
Explaining the relevant sense of “perceptually justified” is more dif-
ficult, however, because attempting to define epistemic justification is a no-
toriously thorny undertaking. Nevertheless, the concept does have a broad,
intuitive sense, which I will employ here. I choose the broad sense for two
reasons. The first is that I do not wish to face the minefield of providing my
own definition. The second is that, by using the broad sense, I can ensure
that the results of my argument are due to the force of my argument alone
and not to some anomalous conception of justification. The same is true
for defeasibility. By using noncontroversial notions of both concepts, I can
be confident that any results will come solely from my own argument.
The broad sense of justification characterizes it as a reason or set of
reasons that support a belief. We therefore say that the justification for a
belief P is the evidence which we have for P, and that the evidence for P
justifies P. We also say that a belief P is justified by source A just in case A is a
set of reasons epistemically relevant to P (Casullo 106). Here, “epistemically
relevant” means that the set of reasons in A actually give one a good reason
to believe P. Of course, in merely clarifying the broad sense of justification,
2 For more on these distinctions, see Casullo 66. Philosophers have proposed other names for
the two kinds of defeaters, but “overriding” and “undermining” are currently the most common.
The hierarchy of empirical DefeasiBiliTy 27
I have introduced several potentially volatile concepts—philosophical rigor
cries out for articulations of “support,” “evidence,” and “epistemically rel-
evant to P.” I will forego these articulations, however. The aim of my argu-
ment is not to analyze knowledge or even to enter that debate directly; I
wish only to uncover several nonobvious aspects of empirical defeasibility.
For this purpose our intuitive concepts will be sufficient. Note that per-
ceptually justified beliefs are a subset of empirical beliefs. Nonperceptual
empirical beliefs are those justified by testimony, memory, or other nonper-
ceptual empirical sources.
The last term in need of clarification is “perceptual justification.”
Although it is certainly a form of empirical justification, we need to dis-
tinguish perceptual justification from other empirical justifications such as
testimony and memory. Therefore, we say that a perceptual justification for a
belief P is a reason or set of reasons which support P and whose supportive
content consists of information acquired directly from one or more of the
five basic sensory modalities. A source whose supportive content consists
only of information thus acquired perceptually justifies P. We also say that a
belief P is perceptually justified by a source just in case that source is a set of
reasons that constitute a perceptual justification for P.3
The final preliminary question is whether perceptually justified be-
liefs are inferential—that is, whether they are inferred from some other
proposition. I will here assume the non-inferential thesis, which states that
perceptually justified beliefs are direct and not inferred from some other
proposition. The non-inferential thesis claims, among other things, that
the beliefs
(P1) I am appeared to in a chair-like way
(P2) I see a chair
are essentially equivalent. This thesis is also fairly noncontroversial. Later
in my argument I will show that the inferential possibilities from (P2) are
limited, which exposes similar beliefs to various empirical defeaters.
Thus settled in, I introduce my argument. I propose to discuss the
relationship between perceptually justified beliefs and defeasibility. Hap-
pily, we already see at least one relationship between them—I defined
defeasibility using the concept of justification. This is exactly the relation-
ship I wish to explore. More specifically, I wish to examine several exam-
ples of perceptually justified beliefs and their interaction with empirical
3 In this definition of perceptual justification, I have left open the possibility that a belief P can be
epistemically overdetermined—P may be justified both by perceptual and by nonperceptual sourc-
es. In this paper I am interested only in perceptually justified beliefs and so restrict the domain of
possible beliefs to those which are only perceptually justified.
28 Bryce Gessell
defeaters. Contemporary epistemology seems to have taken these relation-
ships for granted by relying on apparently intuitive standards of justifica-
tion when evaluating the strength of empirical defeaters. I hope to more
thoroughly parse and explain these interactions. However, my argument
should not be understood as offering a complete theory, which would pro-
vide a comprehensive list of information types with the experience kinds
that produce them. It would also give a complete account of the defea-
sibility relationships between perceptually justified beliefs and other em-
pirically justified beliefs. This paper, on the other hand, offers only an
introduction to a more rigorous theory of defeasibility and a direction for
future research.
In the course of my argument it will also become clear that epistemic
categories such as “empirical defeaters” or even “perceptually justified be-
liefs” may be too broad to be useful. I will offer a new way to organize some
of these beliefs. My arrangement is based on the unique sensory capacities
of human beings and the types of information those capacities generate.
This arrangement classifies perceptually justified beliefs by information
type, and each information type will both produce and be subject to par-
ticular epistemic defeaters. The ultimate result is a greater understanding
of the defeasibility relationships among empirically justified beliefs.
Visually Justified Beliefs and Defeasibility
My argument proceeds through three defeasibility cases. By isolating
one sensory modality, these cases show what is unique about that modality
and the epistemic ramifications of this uniqueness. The first case deals with
vision, the second with hearing, and the third with touch.
To begin, suppose that S is a man with normally-functioning sensory
capacities which he has no reason to believe are faulty. S stands with eyes
closed facing an object ω in the center of a room from a particular view-
point V . Upon opening his eyes, S looks at ω briefly without moving his
1
head or making a saccade.4 He seems to see a vase and forms belief (1):
“I see a vase.” S now moves with eyes closed from V to a different view-
1
point—V —and looks at ω again in the same manner. After seeming to see
2
a birdbath S forms belief (2): “I see a birdbath.” S moves with eyes closed
again, this time to V , and looks at ω in the same way. S then forms belief
3
(3): “I see a table.”
Let us analyze this situation. S has formed three beliefs, all of which
are non-inferential.5 Since the supportive content of each is perceptual
4 A quick movement of the eye that occurs without moving the head.
5 I will omit mention of the inferential status of these beliefs in following examples.
The hierarchy of empirical DefeasiBiliTy 29
and S’s sensory capacities are functioning normally, all three beliefs are
perceptually justified according to the criteria I proposed. Now (2) is also
an overriding defeater for (1) because it justifies a corollary belief that not-
(1). But (3) is an overriding defeater for (2) since it justifies a similar belief
that not-(2). S knows that ω cannot be a vase, a birdbath, and a table, so
S retains (3), rejecting (1) and (2).6 But what reason has S for selecting (3)
above (1) or (2)?
Our intuition is that S ought to discard both (1) and (2) because
they were justified using less information. Belief (3) has the advantage of
information gained from V and V in addition to V , so it must somehow
1 2 3
enjoy a more robust justification. Here we see, for the first time, an intui-
tive standard according to which we can measure justification. Justification
seems to strengthen as its content expands. Since the justification for (3)
incorporates the justifications for (1) and (2), belief (3) seems better justi-
fied for S, and so he ought to reject (1) and (2).
At least, that S must retain (3) while rejecting (1) and (2) is our intu-
ition; however, I argue that the perceptual justifications for (1), (2), and (3)
are of equal strength and that S has no greater reason to retain (3) than he
does to retain (1) or (2). Suppose that S moved to a new viewpoint V and
4
looked at ω again. Depending on the visual information gained from V , S
4
would have either a justification for a new belief (4) or a stronger justifica-
tion for (1), (2), or (3). The same process would hold for V , V , V , etc. The
5 6 7
information gained from each distinct viewpoint would justify a new belief
or a previously defeated belief. This means that S would have no reason to
choose (3) over (1) or (2), since the corresponding overriding defeaters are
such that they can defeat both earlier and later beliefs in the series. The key
is that, with added information, belief (4) might defeat (3), but S has no way
of knowing this conclusively.
Obviously this process cannot continue forever. In the course of S’s
viewing ω from viewpoints V , V , V . . . V , n would quickly get so large
1 2 3 n
that S would see ω from nearly every possible viewpoint. At V S would
n
form a terminal belief (N) which integrated all of the visual data from the
series of viewpoints V –V . (N) would be an overriding defeater for all pre-
1 n
ceding beliefs not equivalent to (N), but no preceding belief could be an
overriding defeater for (N). At this point, our intuition is that S would have
a good reason to retain belief (N) and to reject all other beliefs justified by
data from V to V −1. S would indeed have a good reason to retain (N), but
1 n
not because of the defeasibility relationships among beliefs (1)–(N). Rather,
he has good reason because the visual experience S has of ω when looking
6 Utilitarian considerations about the possibility of using ω as a vase, a birdbath, and a table are
not at issue here. S is trying to identify the object, not speculate on the variety of its uses.
30 Bryce Gessell
from V is different in kind from the visual experience S has of ω when
1
looking from all points in the series V –V . Call the kind of visual experi-
1 n
ence which justified beliefs (1)–(N−1) flash vision. Further, call the kind of
visual experience that justified (N) spherical vision.7 (N) is not defeasible by
any justified belief (1)–(N−1) because beliefs justified by spherical vision
cannot be defeated by beliefs justified by flash vision. Defeasibility relation-
ships of this variety cannot cross these particular boundaries.8
This leads to my first substantive theses. I propose the following:
(T1) Each sensory modality produces distinct expe-
rience kinds.
We have seen that experience kinds are epistemically meaningful because
of the defeasibility relationships among them. In fact, the defeasibility re-
lationships are consequences of the different information types produced
by experience kinds.
(T2) Each experience kind produces distinct infor-
mation types.
Information types form the content of perceptually justified beliefs. They
can be weak or strong. Consider the information type produced by flash vi-
sion: one image of an object ω from a single viewpoint. While many objects
are recognizable with this limited information, many are not. In contrast,
spherical vision produces a complete visual profile of ω and can lead to one
of two outcomes—S’s correctly identifying ω or S’s experiencing a new object
ω. This correct identification would be part of a new belief or, what is more
likely, it would confirm a previous belief. The information type produced
by spherical vision is distinct from and stronger than the type produced by
flash vision. We have already seen this in (N)’s being indefeasible by any
preceding belief in the series. We can formalize this observation:
(T3) Certain perceptually justified beliefs are inde-
feasible by certain others.
(T3) is noncontroversial and matches our intuition about perceptually justi-
fied beliefs—later, I will show the more interesting result of which perceptu-
7 Although these characterizations call to mind J. J. Gibson’s distinction in his book The Ecological
Approach to Vision, unlike Gibson, I am concerned not with biological capability or psychology,
but with epistemic consequences.
8 One might object that spherical vision and flash vision are not different kinds of experience in
the way that cats and dogs are different kinds of animals. That they are different kinds should not
be understood so strictly here; the crucial distinction is that the types of information provided by
these two experiences are different. I use “kind” to refer to an experience that generates a unique
information type.
The hierarchy of empirical DefeasiBiliTy 31
ally justified beliefs are indefeasible by which others. The application of
(T3) will be relative to the information types contained in the beliefs in
question, and the two uses of “certain” guarantee this.
Auditorily Justified Beliefs and Defeasibility
Are these theses true of other sensory modalities as well? Consider
hearing, a modality with only one clear experience kind. Auditory experi-
ences are psychophysically distinct from visual experiences because of the
interaction between the physical stimulus, the sensory receptors which
transduce the stimulus, and the cognitive mechanisms which create a pre-
sentation of the external object.9 These psychophysical distinctions limit
the information types available from each sensory modality. Hearing there-
fore produces two information types.10 The first is a general idea of an ob-
ject’s spatial location. The second is a clue about the identity of the object.
As we will see, these information types create the defeasibility relationships
for hearing.
To show that the above theses hold for hearing, suppose that S still
possesses his normally functioning sensory capacities. He stands blind-
folded at position V in a large room. S seems to hear a dog barking and
1
forms belief (1): “I hear a dog barking over there.” He now moves to a new
position V in the same room and then V , forming the same belief in both
2 3
locations: “I hear a dog barking over there.”
Like beliefs justified by vision, beliefs justified by hearing have their
own intrajustificational defeasibility relationships. These relationships are
determined by the information types which hearing is capable of produc-
ing. However, unlike vision, hearing does not produce any information
type that is indefeasible by other auditorily justified beliefs. Any belief in
the series (1), (2), (3) . . . above is a potential overriding defeater for any
other. This defeasibility relationship is unique to hearing. We often miss
the subtleties of these relationships because of the weight normally given to
visually justified beliefs.11 However, by isolating each sensory modality, we
9 The experiences of sight and hearing are different because they provide different information.
Again, while they may not be different “kinds” of experience in the most technical meaning of the
term, the experiences are distinct enough to provide different information to the sentiens.
10 Receiving information through an auditory experience of words spoken in a language which one
understands is a mix of two experience kinds: hearing, which produces information of the two
types I have described, and testimony, which produces information of another type.
11 Most epistemological literature dealing with perceptually justified beliefs considers only visual
justification.
32 Bryce Gessell
see that they are unique in terms of experience kinds, information types,
and defeasibility relationships. In other words, (T1), (T2), and (T3) hold for
each sensory modality.12
Perceptually Justified Beliefs and Empirical Defeaters
How do defeasibility relationships among nonperceptual empirical
defeaters work? Let us return to the case of vision. After having V beliefs
n
about ω that are justified by flash vision, S now has a spherically justified
belief: “I see a table.” Call this belief Ω. Now suppose that S is still viewing
the table when his friend X enters the room. S has been acquainted with
X for many years and has never known him to lie or be dishonest in any
way. Furthermore, S knows that X’s sensory capacities function well. X
tells S, “There is no table in this room.” Call X’s proposition ∼T. ∼T is a
testimonial defeater for Ω and so is an empirical defeater for Ω. What is the
defeasibility relationship between Ω and ∼T? Since the perceptual content
of Ω does not affirm material existence, and since S trusts X, ∼T is an over-
riding defeater for Ω. The information type produced by spherical vision
cannot affirm material existence, so it is susceptible to empirical defeaters
that deny it. In this case, ∼T defeats Ω.13
But the solution is obvious. S need only extend his hand to check
whether the table has material existence or if it is an optical illusion.14 Sup-
pose that, upon extending his hand, S’s finger meets a solid object at the
point where the table’s edge appears to be. In addition, S touches other
areas of what he sees and feels that they are real parts of a table. S now has
a new perceptually justified belief Ω: “There is a table in this room.” Ω
' '
affirms the material existence and the identity of the object. This content
makes Ω very strong, possibly indefeasible by other empirical defeaters.15
'
This means that Ω is an overriding defeater for ∼T regardless of S’s trust in
'
X, and S would be irrational to accept ∼T in the face of such undeniable
12 While I grant that the chemical senses (smelling, tasting) are quite different from sight and hear-
ing, our results here can be generalized because the chemical senses will still only provide distinct
types of information through their various experiences, and the schema for them will be identical
to that for vision and hearing.
13 See the concluding section for a discussion of the challenges of integrating testimonial beliefs
into the system of one’s other justified beliefs. Clearly, the situation will almost always be more
complicated than the one I have presented above.
14 We might say that, for a human being with normally functioning sensory modalities, tactile
senses confirm material existence inasmuch as this is possible at all.
15 It is hard to see what empirical defeaters could challenge Ω. Given the circumstances described
'
and barring global skepticism, I cannot conceive of an overriding defeater ∼Ω, and an undermin-
'
ing defeater for the experience kinds which justify Ω would be very unusual indeed.
'
The hierarchy of empirical DefeasiBiliTy 33
perceptual information to the contrary. The standard against which we
judge this rationality is the content of each belief, since it seems rational
for S to affirm the material existence of something in cases where he can
actually perceive it.
This example demonstrates two things. The first is that, like vision
and hearing, touch has experience kinds that produce distinct information
types. In S’s experience with the table we find at least two experience kinds.
The first kind is swipe tactility, which is the experience of moving a part of
one’s body quickly into an object. The information type generated by swipe
tactility concerns the material existence of the object, and the two possible
outcomes are confirmation or denial of material existence. The second kind
is stroke tactility, which is the experience of moving a part of one’s body
slowly over the contours and edges of an object. The information type gen-
erated by stroke tactility concerns the physical form of the object and works
in conjunction with other information types in object identification.
The Ω example also demonstrates that we cannot evaluate the
'
strength of any empirical defeater, perceptual or otherwise, without infor-
mation about the belief that it purports to defeat. While ∼T is a strong
empirical defeater, it cannot defeat Ω because of the perceptual content of
'
Ω.16 Speaking more generally, concocting situations involving perceptually
'
justified beliefs and empirical defeaters makes little sense unless one also
names the source of the perceptual justifications. Without this informa-
tion, we cannot know which defeasibility relationships will hold among the
beliefs. By (T3) we know that certain perceptually justified beliefs cannot
be defeated by certain others. We also saw earlier that certain perceptu-
ally justified beliefs cannot be defeated by certain empirical defeaters. This
means that
(T4) Certain perceptually justified beliefs are inde-
feasible by certain empirical defeaters.
(T4) is a stronger claim than (T3), but by making one more distinction we
can go even further. Call a belief P a compound perceptually justified belief if
and only if the content of P consists of two or more discrete information
types. Ω is a compound perceptually justified belief. This distinction allows
'
us to propose something even stronger:
(T5) Certain compound perceptually justified be-
liefs are indefeasible by certain empirical defeaters.
(T5) is strong, but it could be strengthened even more. Until now we have
qualified our theses with “certain.” In (T5), what are these “certain” beliefs?
16 Namely, a guarantee of material existence, inasmuch as this is possible.
34 Bryce Gessell
We have seen one in Ω: “There is a table in this room.” The content of
'
Ω consists of information types which (i) correctly identify the object in
'
question and (ii) guarantee its material existence. Now call a belief whose
content consists of information types that meet conditions (i) and (ii) a
conclusive empirical belief. From (T5) and the definition of “conclusive em-
pirical beliefs,” we infer
(T6) Conclusive empirical beliefs are empirically
indefeasible.
In the final section I will explain and defend (T6).
Objections and Conclusions
(T6) is a strong claim, but it is perhaps not as strong as it seems. It enu-
merates a set of indefeasible empirical beliefs of the form “There is a . . .”
or “There exists a . . .” However, (T6) is restricted to conclusive empirical
beliefs, which are themselves bound by the criteria given above. In addition,
(T6) does not cover beliefs justified by induction from multiple observed
cases, as induction requires its own justification. This means that one can
have a conclusive empirical belief about the existence and identity of an
object ω but not about the properties of all such objects ω. If the set of
beliefs it includes is so epistemically limited, why does (T6) matter?
The importance of (T6) is not in enumerating a set of beliefs but
in recognizing the interplay of empirical defeasibility relationships. Our
intuition is that some empirical beliefs are stronger than others. In this
paper, I have given one argument for why this is the case. Empirical beliefs
are justified by experience kinds and experience kinds yield information
types. The content of some information types is stronger than others. A
more complete articulation of this theory would provide a complete list of
information types with the experience kinds that produce them. It would
also give a complete account of the defeasibility relationships between per-
ceptually justified beliefs and other empirically justified beliefs. While I do
not give these here, it is clear that our intuition is correct, and that the rela-
tive strengths of empirical beliefs are organized into a hierarchy. Moreover,
we are able to give the reasons why this is so. We also see that broad terms
like “empirical defeater” and “perceptually justified belief” are difficult to
make exact sense of. Their precise origin matters. Different origins mean
different defeasibility relationships. Unless we know the sources of justifi-
cation for a belief, we cannot adequately evaluate the strength of possible
defeaters.
One might object that this account lacks a particular experience kind
or information type, but this does not affect the substance of my analysis.
The hierarchy of empirical DefeasiBiliTy 35
This objection also concerns a point only ancillary to the more important
thesis. Though the specifics of their enumeration may vary, the more im-
portant point is that defeasibility relationships are what ground our intu-
itions about the strength of empirically justified beliefs.
Another difficulty is the challenge of integrating testimonial defeat-
ers into a system that includes perceptually justified beliefs. But this is actu-
ally a psychological rather than a philosophical problem, since the only way
to measure the relative strength of testimonial defeaters is through one’s
trust in the giver of the testimony. It seems impossible to assign an “objec-
tive” strength to defeaters of this kind, and this impossibility makes the
integration of testimonial defeaters a complicated endeavor. The example I
have given above should be understood as a basic case of how to integrate
testimonial defeaters.
The broader conclusion concerns the sensory modalities as instru-
ments for gathering information. While the senses excel at presenting reali-
ty with certainty, the range of beliefs upon which they bestow that certainty
is quite small. Though this seems as obvious as the intuition that empirical
beliefs are organized into a hierarchy, I have shown that these conclusions
are not just intuitions. They follow from the characteristics of human per-
ceptual organs and the types of information that these provide. Rather
than relying on intuition in evaluating empirical defeasibility relationships,
we can outline a system in which those relationships are thoroughly parsed
and explained. By reflecting on human perceptual capacities, we arrive at
the points where our intuitions meet justificatory grounds.
Works Cited
Casullo, Albert. A Priori Justification. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2003.
Gettier, Edmund. “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23 (1963):
121–23.
Gibson, Jerome James. The Ecological Approach to Vision. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1979.