AporiaVol. 15 number 1—2005
Nietzsche, Heraclitus, and Interpretation
JOSHUA ROBERTS-GILLON
I N [his] proximity I feel altogether warmer and better than
anywhere else. The affirmation of passing away and destroying,
which is the decisive feature of a Dionysian philosophy; saying
Yes to opposition and war; becoming, along with a radical
repudiation of the very concept of being—all this is clearly
more closely related to me than anything else thought to
date. The doctrine of the “eternal recurrence,” that is, of the
unconditional and infinitely repeated circular course of all
things—this doctrine of Zarathustra might in the end have been
taught already by Heraclitus.1
So Nietzsche praised Heraclitus in his work Ecce Homo.
Additionally, in a lecture first given in 1872, Nietzsche refers to
Heraclitus’ self-glorification as “übermenschlich,”2 and in Twilight of
the Idols he speaks of his Greek predecessor “with the highest
respect.”3
Clearly, Nietzsche felt a strong affinity for Heraclitus. Recently,
though, Gareth B. Matthews has argued that, with the exception of
1 Ecce Homo729–30.
2 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers55.
3 Twilight of the Idols480.
Joshua Roberts-Gillon is a senior majoring in philosophy and classics at Brigham
Young University. He will graduate in April 2006. This essay won second place in
the 2005 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
2 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
Parmenides, Nietzsche treats the Presocratic philosophers “primarily as
personalities,” and “discourages us from trying to discover what they
found philosophically perplexing.”4 If this were correct, Nietzsche’s
feelings toward Heraclitus would be based on the latter’s force of
personality rather than on any similarity in philosophy. However, in
addition to the above-quoted statement from Ecce Homo, Nietzsche
discusses Heraclitus’ philosophical ideas in several passages, often
shedding great light on his own philosophy.
One of the most interesting of such passages is found in Twilight
of the Idols. After caustically mocking philosophers who have rejected
the senses in hopes of arriving at “being,” he says:
With the highest respect, I except the name of Heraclitus. When
the rest of the philosophic folk rejected the testimony of the senses
because they showed multiplicity and change, he rejected their
testimony because they showed things as if they had permanence
and unity. Heraclitus too did the senses an injustice. They lie
neither in the way the Eleatics believed, nor as he believed—they
do not lie at all. What we make of their testimony, that alone
introduces lies . . . But Heraclitus will remain eternally right with
his assertion that being is an empty fiction. The “apparent” world
is the only one: the “true” world is merely added by a lie.5
This passage presents a number of difficulties that I will discuss in this
paper—difficulties that are enlightening in terms of Nietzsche’s own
philosophy. I will discuss these difficulties by examining Nietzsche’s
interpretation of Heraclitus in light of the passage in question (Section 1),
showing that this interpretation leads to seeming contradictions with
ideas that Nietzsche professes elsewhere (Section 2), and suggestinghow
these contradictions might be resolved (Section 3). This resolution will
allow me to draw conclusions about Nietzsche’s philosophy.
Specifically,I will conclude that Nietzsche rejects any interpretation of
the world that professes to be absolutely true or does not allow for new
experiences. I will also conclude that Matthews’ claim that Nietzsche
4 Matthews 59.
5 Twilight of the Idols480–81.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 3
does not encourage us to engage the Presocratics philosophically is
demonstrably incorrect.
1. A Nietzschean Reading of Heraclitus
In the above-quoted passage from Twilight of the Idols, Nietzsche
hints at what a consistent interpretation of Heraclitus might look like,
including a list of three key features that such an interpretation must
include:
(1) That Heraclitus rejects the testimony of the senses rather
than rejecting, as Nietzsche suggests he should, the
interpretation that individuals place on such testimony
(“What we make of their testimony”);
(2) That this rejection of the senses was a result of rejecting
“being”;
(3) That Heraclitus maintains that the apparent world is the
only world.
These three assertions serve as criteria in establishing a more detailed
Nietzschean interpretation of Heraclitus. It will be convenient to refer
to them as Nietzsche’s Criteria (NC). Each of the three points of (NC)
will be discussed in order.
(NC1) That Heraclitus Rejects the Testimony of the Senses
Several of the extant Heraclitean fragments concernthe testimony
of the senses. Perhaps the most direct is fragment 5 M which simply
states “The things of which there is seeing, hearing, and perception, these
do I prefer.”6 This fragment seems devastating to (NC1); Heraclitus’
endorsement of the testimony of the senses is unambiguous. Indeed, if
this were all that Heraclitus gave us, we would be forced to conclude
6 Marcovich 21.
4 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
that Nietzsche so badly misread him as to remove all reasonablehope of
profitably studying Nietzsche’s views on the matter. Fortunately
though, there are other fragments.
At first glance, the fragment that seems most promising is 13 M:
“Eyes and ears are bad witnesses for men if they have barbarian souls.”7
If this statement is taken as limiting the previous fragment, there may
be room for Nietzsche’s interpretation. The senses are not always
reliable witnesses; they are reliable only to those who possess the correct
kind of soul. This view, however, is problematic in its own right,
since the word translated as barbarian is misleading. Strabo, the
ancient Greek writer, gives us the following explanation:
The word barbaroswas at first spoken onomatopoeically, with
reference to people whose pronunciations of words was difficult,
harsh and rough—just as one speaks of stammering, lisping or
faltering . . . It became clear that the way they speak arises . . .
from the peculiarities of their various languages.8
Thus a barbarian is one who is difficult for Greeks to understand
because of a difference in language—one who does not speak Greek.
For this reason, fragment 13 M is not generally translated as I have
translated it. Marcovich renders the fragment as “Evil witnesses are
eyes and ears for men, if they have souls that do not understand their
language.”9 Kahn translates it as “Eyes and ears are poor witnesses for
men if their souls do not understand the language.”10 Given this
reading, the senses are only bad witnesses to those who misinterpret
what they are saying; more precisely, the problem lies not in the senses,
but in the interpretationof them. This, however, directly contradicts
the view that Nietzsche ascribes to Heraclitus.
Nietzsche, though, translates the fragment very differently. In his
1872 lecture he gives it as “Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men
7 Ibid. 45, my translation.
8 Crawford and Whitehead 31.
9 Marcovich 47.
10 Kahn 35.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 5
havingmuddied souls,”11and in the subsequent Philosophy in the Tragic
Age of the Greeks he paraphrases it with “their eyes and ears and their
intellect in general is a poor witness when ‘moist slime fills their
souls.’”12 This reading, which offers the first clue to a consistent
Nietzschean interpretation, seems to be based on a suggestion Jacob
Bernays first published in 1854, eighteen years before Nietzsche’s
lectures on the Presocratics.
Bernays suggested that in place of barbarous psychas echonton (“if
they have barbarian souls”), the fragment should read borborou psychas
echontos (“if mud clings to their souls”).13 Making this change, the
whole fragment becomes “Eyes and ears are bad witnesses for men if
mud takes up their souls.”14 In this modified reading, Nietzsche sees a
great harmony with other fragments of Heraclitus, specifically those
that mention wet souls or mire. He develops the following idea about
the significance of a soul’s being muddy or wet:
Insofar as [man] shares, of necessity, in fire [humans are
warm-blooded],he has a plus of rationality; insofar as he consists
of water and earth [human bodies contain both water and dry
matter], his reason is in a bad way.15
Since “‘souls take pleasure in becoming moist’” and “to rejoice at
mire . . . is the essence of humanity,”16“man, generally speaking, is . . .
an irrational creature;”17he is considered “as contrary to the Logos.”18
In contrast to mud or water, on Nietzsche’s interpretation, the
“loftiest phenomenon” in nature “is fire,”19 and fiery souls are the
most rational and most nearly divine—the most able to comprehend
11 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers73.
12 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks63.
13 Bernays 95, my translation.
14 Ibid., my translation.
15 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks63.
16 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers73.
17 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks63.
18 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers73.
19 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks63.
6 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
the Logos.20 It should not be unexpected, then, that fiery souls and
gods see the world from a different perspective than muddy souls. “To
God all things appear as good while to mankind much appears as
bad. The entire wealth of contradiction and sorrow that Heraclitus
affirms disappears for God contemplating unseen harmony.”21
To emphasize the amount of difference that a new perspective
can make, Nietzsche recalls a thought experiment of Karl Ernst.
Suppose that the rate of human perception should increase by a factor of
one hundred thousand, and that the life expectancy should decrease
proportionately.
Then we would consider the grass and flowers to be something
just as absolute and persistent as we now consider the mountains;
we would perceive in the growth of a bud as much and as little
as a lifetime, like when we think of the geological periods of the
earth. We would be totally unable to observe the voluntary
movementsof animals, for they would be far too slow; at best we
could conceive of them as we (in our time frame) think of the
heavenly bodies.22
On the other hand, if our rate of perception should decrease, and our
life expectancy increase, by one hundred thousand times, “Every
shape appearing to us as persistent would vanish in the superhaste of
events and would be devoured by the wild storm of Becoming.”23
This ceaseless becoming must be what “the eternally living fire,
(Aeon, boy-god of the zodiac),”24 in whose eyes the lifespan of a
mountain is but an infinitesimal fraction of life, perceives.25 In
20 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers74.
21 Ibid. 70.
22 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers61.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.70. Dr. Daniel Graham has pointed out that Nietzsche is likely equating
aeon (“age”) with aeizoon (“ever-living”), the adjective used to describe fire in
fragment 51 M, on the basis of a superficial similarity.
25 Ibid. Cf. fragment 93 M.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 7
Nietzsche’s view, Heraclitus attributes to the gods a sort of privileged
perspective. They are the closest to eternal fire; they, unlike human
beings, are able to fully comprehend the Logos.
It is with this in mind that one must understand Nietzsche’s
assertion about the deceptive nature of the senses. According to
Nietzsche’s interpretation of Heraclitus, the senses dodeceive us. They
deceive us because, as a result of our inherently muddy nature, we are
unable to fully gain the perspective from which they might show us the
true nature of the cosmos—becoming.
(NC2) That Heraclitus’ Rejection of the Senses was motivated by a Rejection
of Being
Nietzsche articulately describes the type of being that he believes
Heraclitus rejects when, in speaking of other philosophers, Nietzsche
says “They think that they show their respect for a subject when they
de-historicize it, sub specie aeterni—when they turn it into a mummy.”
These philosophers lack “historical sense” and hate “the very idea of
becoming.”26What Heraclitus rejects, then, is the idea of permanence,
the idea that some things remain the same eternally, regardless of
history—like a mummy. This leads to two immediate questions con-
cerning Nietzsche’s view: to what extent is the lack of permanence
universal, and why, exactly, does Heraclitus reject permanence?
Even in Nietzsche’s interpretation, it seems difficult to exclude all
permanence from Heraclitus’ philosophy. In the thought experiment
discussed above certain features of the cosmos appear to remain the
same, even when our perceptions are distorted in the extreme. For
example, “the solar ecliptic would appear as a luminous bow across the
sky.”27
A more interesting case of permanence becomes apparent when
Nietzsche considers Heraclitus’ doctrine of opposites. He says, “light
and dark, bitter and sweet are attached to each other and interlocked
26 Twilight of the Idols479.
27 The Pre-Platonic Philosophers61.
8 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
at any given moment like wrestlers of whom sometimes the one,
sometimesthe other is on top.”28The objects and qualities we observe
in the world are “but the momentary ascendancy of one partner. But
this by no means signifies the end of the war; the contest endures in
all eternity.”29 This insight leads Nietzsche to ask:
Does it now look as though “becoming” were but the coming-to-
be-visible of the struggle between eternal qualities? Should our
talk of coming-to-be perhaps be derived from the peculiar
weaknessof human insight, whereas in the true nature of things
there is no coming-to-be at all, but only a synchronicity of many
true realities which were not born and will not die?30
It is a permanentstruggle between permanentopposing forces that creates
the transient world. For Nietzsche, this struggle is the Heraclitean
Logos—“the continuous working out of a unified, lawful, reasonable”
world.31 Change, then, is not the sole feature of the cosmos; there is,
however, no permanence of objects or properties, only of struggle.
Why, though, does Heraclitus reject permanence on such a large
scale if our senses show us “permanence and unity?” According to
Nietzsche, it is because of his view of struggling opposites. To make this
point, Nietzsche draws a parallel to modern scientists. “For them, ‘All
things flow’ . . . is a main proposition. Nowhere does an absolute per-
sistence exist, because we always come in the final analysis to forces.”32
Just as forces are logically prior to observable properties for physicists,
struggle and opposition are logically prior to objects and propertiesfor
Heraclitus. For Nietzsche, then, the foundation of Heraclitean philos-
ophy is this: Heraclitus saw struggle and lawful order throughout the
cosmos; he then realized that universal struggle was incompatible with
28 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks54.
29 Ibid. 55.
30 Ibid. 58.
31 Ibid. 64.
32 Ibid. 60.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 9
permanence of objects and properties.33Since the senses, from our per-
spective, perceive permanence, they must be giving us misinformation.
(NC3) That the Apparent World is the Only World
The claim that the apparent world is the only world can be
understood in several different ways. The strongest understanding of
this claim is that an object or property exists in the world if and only
if we perceive it; perception is reality. We have already seen, though,
that perception is only reality from a particular perspective—aperspective
that humans do not enjoy. Thus our perceptions deceive us in showing
us permanence.
A weaker reading can be obtained by placing Heraclitus in the
historical context in which Nietzsche places him, as a response to
Anaximander. According to Nietzsche, Anaximander’s apeiron was an
attempt to explain becoming. “That which truly is, concludes
Anaximander, cannot possess definite characteristics.” It can “be
designated by human speech only as a negative, as something to
which the existent world . . . can give no predicate.”34 Heraclitus,
though, does not need an apeironto explain the changing nature of the
world—he can explain it entirely in terms of the struggle between
opposing forces. Although the objects and properties that appear as a
result of this struggle are temporary, they are also positive. Heraclitus
thus rejects the idea that there is a reality that defiesperception, a reality
that possesses only negative qualities.
33 Of course, the universal nature of struggle does not logically entail the
transience of objects and properties. When two perfectly balanced opposing
forces meet, the object on which they are acting does not move at all. When
a strong force meets a weaker opposing one, the object on which they are acting
moves only in the direction in which the stronger force is pushing it. For
Heraclitus, though, objects are constantly being moved back and forth between
the same opposing forces. This implies a concept of force that is much more
similar to what is encountered on a battlefield than in a physics textbook.
34 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks 47.
10 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
More fully developed, Nietzsche’s Heraclitus Interpretation (NHI)
is now:
(1) No unperceivable reality is necessary to explain the
world of experience.
(2) The world consists of positive qualities, and is the result
of an eternal struggle between opposing forces in
which neither contender can gain a permanent victory.
(3) There is a preferred perspective that humans do not
generally enjoy, but from which (2) can be verified by
the senses.
Comparing (NHI) to (NC), a few observations are in order. (NHI1) is
an explanation of (NC3); Heraclitus rejects any “other world” as
unnecessary to explain the world of human experience. (NHI2) is an
explanation of (NC2); Heraclitus rejects the permanence (“being”) of
objects and properties, preferring an eternal struggle between opposing
forces as an explanation for the world that we perceive. Since the
senses show permanence, they must, to some degree, be rejected.
(NHI3) is an explanation of (NC1); the senses are rejected to the
extent that they do not show us the world from the proper perspective.
2. Some Paradoxes Arising from (NC) and (NHI)
It is worthwhile to notice to what extent Nietzsche agrees or
disagrees with Heraclitean philosophy as expressed in (NC) and (NHI).
Returning to the above quoted passage from Twilight of the Idols, it is
apparent that Nietzsche disagrees with Heraclitus in one very important
respect: “Heraclitus too did the senses an injustice . . . they do not lie at
all.”35 Insofar as (NC1) is an accurate representation of Heraclitus’
ideas, Nietzsche rejects him. Therefore, Nietzsche does not believe
(NHI3). On the other hand, there is an equally important point on
which he agrees with the Presocratic: “Heraclitus will remain eternally
35 Twilight of the Idols480.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 11
right with his assertion that being is an empty fiction. The ‘apparent’
world is the only one: the ‘true’ world is merely added by a lie.”36
As far as (NC3) is concerned, Nietzsche agrees with Heraclitus; he
accepts (NHI1).
Nietzsche’s disagreement with Heraclitus concerning (NC1) is
problematic. Consider the following passage from Daybreak:
My eyes, however strong or weak they may be, can see only a
certain distance, and it is within the space encompassed by this
distance that I live and move, the line of this horizonconstitutes
my immediate fate, in great things and small, from which I cannot
escape . . . Our ears enclose us within a comparable circle, and so
does our sense of touch. Now, it is by these horizons . . . that we
measurethe world, we say that this is near and that far, this is big
and that small, this is hard and that soft: this measuring we call
sensation: and it is all of it an error!37
Here Nietzsche states plainly that sensationis an error, although he does
not limit sensation to sensory perception. Sensation is the “measuring”
that comes from our senses, the combination of perception and inter-
pretation. If Nietzsche is opposed to rejecting sensory perception, he
must, as he indicates Heraclitus should, reject the interpretation that
we make of our perceptions. This, however, is rather paradoxical.
According to Nietzsche, there is no “true world,” only an “apparent”
one.38 If there is no true world against which to compare the interpre-
tation of our perceptions, in what sense can they be incorrect?
This problem is reminiscent of one that was considered above: if
Heraclitus denies the existence of a true world, in what sense can our
perceptions be wrong? The solution was provided by (NHI3). All of our
perceptions are false to the extent that they fail to square with what we
would perceive if we had the proper perspective. This eliminates the
need to posit any other world, and at the same time allows our percep-
tions to be false. Perhaps an analogous model—one that will allow us
to reject interpretations rather than perceptions—is in order; Nietzsche
36 Ibid. 481.
37 Daybreak73.
38 See note 36 above.
12 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
could say that there is a preferred interpretation, and that any other
interpretation is undesirable to the extent that it fails to correspond
to the preferred one. This would allow him to accept the testimony of
the senses, reject bad interpretations, and not posit a “true” world.
Unfortunately, this suggestion leads to other problems. Since
Nietzsche rejects (NHI3), the only logically consistent way for him to
accept the testimony of the senses is to reject the idea of a preferred
perspective. This means that a preferred interpretation cannot be the
result of seeing things in a particular way. Furthermore, since the senses
do not lie, every interpretation that we give to our perceptions should
serve to explain the same set of phenomena—the set that we experience.
This suggests that perhaps the preferred interpretation is the one that
adequately explains what is perceived. However, Nietzsche thinks that
many interpretations are always available for explaining any one thing.
He states this well when, in Beyond Good and Evil, he says that
“somebody might come along who, with opposite intentions and
modes of interpretation, could . . . end by asserting the same about
this world as you do.”39 If there is a preferred interpretation, there
must be a way to distinguish it from others that end up “asserting the
same about this world.”
One suggestion that comes to mind is the will to power—the
greater the will to power that an explanatory interpretation demonstrates,
the better the interpretation. Assuming that this is correct, Heraclitus’
interpretation of the world can be faulted only to the extent that it
does not exhibit will to power. This, though, raises several issues of its
own. If (NHI2) is correct, Heraclitus explains the entire cosmos in
terms of struggle. To complicate matters even further, Nietzsche identifies
the Heraclitean cosmic struggle with will.40 (NHI2), then, affirms that
the seemingly lawful behavior of nature is the result of struggling wills.
This sounds strikingly like Nietzsche’s claims about the will to power.
Not only does he say that will to power can explain “allefficient force,”
he says that a physical theory based on will to power would assert the
39 Beyond Good and Evil220.
40 Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks56. Nietzsche actually associates the
cosmic struggle with Schopenhauer’s concept of will, pointing out only that it
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 13
same things about the world that a theory based on natural laws does.41
If Heraclitus’ theory does not exhibit will to power, it is difficult to
see why.
Any consistent reading of Nietzsche must take into account all of
his ideas. As far as the present subject is concerned, a consistent reading
must explain how Nietzsche can reject certain interpretations that
people impose on their perceptions without doing any of the following:
positing a true world, positing a preferred perspective, rejecting the
senses, or preferring one interpretation over another because of
explanatory value or exhibition of will to power. It may be tempting to
say that Nietzsche is inconsistent on this point or that he changed his
views relevant to Heraclitus throughout the course of his life. I believe,
however, that a more charitable reading is possible.
3. Toward a Resolution
One of the reasons that Nietzsche gives for rejecting sensation
(perception plus interpretation) is that this rejection provides
“absolutely no escape, no backway or bypath into the real world.”42
Since there is no real world, though, this seems like a strange reason to
reject anything. Nietzsche offers a small clue about his reasoning when,
speaking of sensation, he says that “We sit within our net . . . and what-
ever we may catch in it, we can catch nothing at all except that which
allows itself to be caught in precisely our net.”43 At least part of the
problem with sensation, then, is that it does not afford us any under-
standing of things that fit entirely outside of it. Since the only world is
is not as “gloomy” and is more “blessed.” In Beyond Good and Evil, though, he
highlights a more relevant difference: Schopenhauer's will cannot explain the
“mechanistic” world, which is the express purpose of the Heraclitean cosmic
struggle. Nietzsche identifies the will to power as a will similar to Schopenhauer’s
but capable of explaining the material world (Beyond Good and Evil237–38).
41 Beyond Good and Evil238, 220.
42 Daybreak73.
43 Ibid.
14 JOSHUAROBERTS-GILLON
the apparent one, there should not be anything that cannot be per-
ceived in some sense. Whatever fits outside of sensation, therefore,
must be something that either is not allowed by our interpretation of
the world or simply does not exist. On this view, an interpretation is
inadequate if it does not allow room for understanding whatever is per-
ceived.
At first, this appears to be equivalent to saying that interpretations
are only as good as their explanatory value—an idea that has already
been shown to be unacceptable. There is an important distinction,
though. The claim that an interpretation explainsphenomena is much
stronger than the claim that it does not contradictthem. Nietzsche does
not claim that sensation needs to explain anything; he only claims that
interpretation needs to allow for whatever is perceived. The value of an
interpretation lies in its openness to new experiences.
What, then, of interpretations that do not allow for other
interpretations? Clearly, they must be rejected. There is always the
possibility of a new experience that is completely foreign to one’s
interpretation of the world. A thoughtful person who has such an
experience can either reject the experience or find a new interpretation.
Rejecting the experience necessarily involves rejecting perception to
some degree. For a philosopher who values the senses, finding a new
interpretation is the only option. This, however, is impossible if one’s
previous interpretation of the world does not allow for competitors.
Any interpretation that claims to have a monopoly on truth must
therefore be rejected.
The only acceptable interpretations of the world are those that
are open to new experiences and do not profess to be absolutely true.
This basic insight clarifies Nietzsche’s denunciation of sensation and
causes all of the seeming contradictions that arise from his reading of
Heraclitus to disappear. It allows him to reject many of the interpretations
that people impose on their perceptions without positing a true world
or a preferred perspective, rejecting the senses, or using explanatory
value or will to power as criteria for preferring one interpretation
over another.
NIETZSCHE, HERACLITUS, ANDINTERPRETATION 15
Conclusion
Nietzsche is a thinker who presented much of his own philoso-
phy as a response to other’s ideas, as exemplified by his interpretation
of and commentary on Heraclitus. Consequently, an examination of
that interpretation provides us with insights into his own views. One
such view, that interpretations are only acceptable if they are open to
new experiences and do not profess to be absolutely true, has been
addressed in this paper. It is likely, though, that Nietzsche’s under-
standing of Heraclitean philosophy could also shed light on such ideas
as the will to power, the eternal recurrence, and the overman—all ideas
that Nietzsche attributes to, or mentions in conjunction with,
Heraclitus.
Matthews’s claim that Nietzsche discourages us from engaging
with the Presocratics on a philosophical level is simply false. Nietzsche
himself engages with them philosophically. He explains their ideas,
responds to their ideas, and occasionally criticizes their ideas. In addi-
tion to clarifying his own views, his comments portray the Presocratics
as profoundly interesting and relevant philosophers.
Works Cited
Bernays, Jacob, Gesammelte Abhandlung. Vol. 1. Edited by Hermann
Usener. Hildesheim, NY:G. Olms, 1971.
Crawford, Michael and David Whitehead. Archaic and Classical
Greece:A Selection of Ancient Sources in Translation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Kahn, Charles. The Art and Thought of Heraclitus: An Edition of the
Fragments withTranslation and Commentary. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Marcovich, M. Heraclitus: Greek Text with a Short Commentary. Merida,
Venezuela: The Los Andes University Press, 1967.
Matthews, Gareth B. “Nietzsche on the Beginnings of Western
Philosophy.” In Uses and Abuses of the Classics: Western
Interpretations of Greek Philosophy, edited by Jorge J. E. Gracia
and Jiyuan Yu. London: Ashgate, 2004.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Beyond Good and Evil. In Basic Writings of
Nietzsche. Translated and edited by Walter Kaufmann.
New York: Random House, 1967.
———. Daybreak. Translated by R. J. Hollingsdale. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1982.
———. Ecce Homo. In Basic Writings of Nietzsche. Translated and edited
by Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random House, 1967.
———. Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Translated by Marianne
Cowan. Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing, 1962.
———. The Pre-Platonic Philosophers. Translated and edited by Greg
Whitlock. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2001.
———. Twilight of the Idols. In The Portable Nietzsche. Translated and
edited by Walter Kaufmann. New York: Penguin, 1954.