Aporiavol. 17 no. 1—2007
Ascribing Knowledge in Context:
Some Objections to the Contextualist’s
Solution to Skepticism
MICHAELHANNON
T
HE history of skepticism is extensive and complex. The issue has
changed shape numerous times, thus making it difficult to combat a
general skeptical problem. Contemporarily, the dilemma is structured in
the form of the skeptical hypothesis (SH), and it is this formulation that
is the focus of this paper.
The core element of the skeptical hypothesis is the possibility of a
delusion (D) that is irreconcilable with some ordinary empirical proposi-
tion (O) that one allegedly knows. The delusion may be that “I am dreaming”
(Descartes), “I am a brain in a vat” (Putnam), or “zebras are actually cleverly
painted mules” (Dretske). Equally, the empirical propositions that I claim
ordinarily to know might include “I am standing,” “I have hands,” and
“zebras are not actually cleverly painted mules.”
The skeptical hypothesis (SH) can be expressed in three parts:
(1) It is not the case that I know that I am not deluded.
(2) If I do not know that I am not deluded, then I do not know
some ordinary empirical proposition.
Michael Hannon recently finished his undergraduate studies at York University
where he majored in criminology and philosophy. He was admitted to the
University of London (King’s College) for philosophy but has decided to defer his
acceptance for one year in order to study the history of Western philosophy. For his
graduate studies, he plans on researching both moral education and moral intuition
through the works of Wittgenstein.
56 MICHAELHANNON
(3) Therefore, it is not the case that I know some ordinary
empirical proposition.
However, a significant fact is missing from this formulation, namely:
(4) I know some ordinary empirical proposition (e.g., that I
have hands).
Individually, both SH and (4) seem plausible. On the one hand, however
unlikely it may seem to suppose that I am deluded, it also seems true that
I do not know that I am not deluded; indeed, how could I know such a
thing? On the other hand, if I propose that I have hands, or if I propose
any other ordinary empirical assertion, it seems persuasively true.
Nevertheless when taken together, these claims result in a logical contra-
diction; that is, it is not the case that I know O—given (1) and (2)—and yet
I know O. Something has to give.
There are three possible ways to reject SH. One can deny the first
premise, maintaining instead that one does in fact know that one is not
deluded. This position was famously—perhaps infamously—defended by
G.E. Moore in his “Proof of an External World.” One can also deny the
second premise by arguing that people can know both O and D simulta-
neously. Fred Dretske and Robert Nozick have taken this position by denying
the validity of the epistemic principle of deductive closure. Finally, one can
allow both (1) and (3) in contexts where SH has been raised, while never-
theless allowing for the denial of (3) in ordinary conversational contexts.
Keith DeRose, Stewart Cohen, and Ludwig Wittgenstein are the principal
defenders of this position.
Contextualism holds that skepticism is insoluble and that once SH
has been raised, any attempt to refute the skeptic on her own ground is des-
tined to fail. For this reason, the contextualist is willing to concede both
the first and second premises to the skeptic since considering the premises
implies that SH is necessarily in play. However, the contextualist also main-
tains that skepticism does not necessarily conflict with our ordinary claims
of possessing knowledge. It is wrongly assumed that in order to refute the
skeptic one must show that the skeptical possibility (D) does not obtain.
The contextualist would argue that ascriptions of knowledge are context-
sensitive, and that the truth-values of utterances involving the word
“know” (and its cognates) depend on standards that are contextually
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 57
determined. Skeptical arguments only succeed because they exploit the
conversational context in which words that have epistemic significance are
uttered. However, in ordinary conversational contexts where there is no
possibility of skeptical error, it isperfectly appropriate to ascribe knowl-
edge to subjects who utter an O. Therefore, we can in ordinary contexts be
said to know O.
In this paper, I intend to criticize the contextualist solution to the
problem of skepticism. The contextualist would have us believe that skep-
ticism does not necessarily conflict with our claims of ordinary knowledge
possession and that knowledge is possible given what the skeptic says. This
is because ascriptions of knowledge are ostensibly context sensitive, and
their truth-values depend on contextually determined standards. However,
although contextualism provides very persuasive arguments against skepti-
cism, I will demonstrate that this position is vulnerable to a number of
objections. I maintain that if contextualism is to be considered a viable
theory, these objections must be resolved.
This paper is divided into three sections. In the first, I examine two
notable alternatives to the skeptical hypothesis. Specifically, I outline both
the Moorean denial of the first premise and the Dretskean denial of the
second premise. I demonstrate that both positions are flawed and thus
ineffective in disarming the skeptic. In the second part, I critically analyze
the anti-skeptical position offered by the contextualists. This analysis con-
sists of providing a general outline of contextualism, as well as its relevance
to the problem of skepticism. In the third part, I levy some objections to
the contextualist treatment of skepticism.
Moorean Denial of the First Premise
Moore has reacted to SH by arguing that, despite the initial plausi-
bility of (1), he is significantly more certain of (4) (“Here is a hand,” says
Moore, with a characteristic wave). However plausible the premises of SH
may be, it is more reasonable to maintain that we do in fact know many
things; thus, SH lacks the impetus to topple our knowledge of many ordinary
empirical facts. When reflecting on Descartes’ dreaming hypothesis, Moore
willingly concedes the second premise, stating, “I agree with the part of the
argument which asserts that if I do not know that I am not dreaming, it fol-
lows that I do not know that I am not standing up.” Moore then proclaims,
58 MICHAELHANNON
however, that he does knowthat he is standing up (4), and concludes that the
skeptical alternative must therefore be false given (2). Since the paradox
arises from maintaining both SH and (4), Moore is content with rejecting
SH in favor of (4) because it has persuasive, intuitive plausibility.
However, this solution is not very satisfying for several reasons. In On
Certainty, Wittgenstein suggests that Moore’s argument fails because his
claim to know O invites the question of how he came to know O, thus
dragging him back into the skeptical debate. By failing to account for how
he came to know O, Moore also fails to demonstrate how D is false. Thus,
Wittgenstein remarks that “Moore’s view really comes down to this: the
concept ‘know’ is analogous to the concept ‘believe’” (5). Moore resorts to
mere picking and choosing without a sufficient grounding for his decision.
Simply to argue that it is adequate to rely on one’s intuition of O rather
than D fails to recognize that D itself has considerable intuitive pull. In
seeking a solution to skepticism we should seek to explain how we fell into
this trap in the first place. Since each premise seems intuitively plausible
when taken individually, Moore indeed seems to resort to arbitrary prefer-
ence. For these and other reasons, many philosophers have rejected the
Moorean anti-skeptical response.
Dretskean Denial of the Second Premise
In “Epistemic Operators,” Dretske denies the second premise of
SH (131–44). As stated, (2) holds that if it is not the case that one knows
that one is not deluded, then it follows that one does not know some
ordinary empirical claim. For instance, if I do not know that zebras are
not actually cleverly painted mules, then I do not know that those animals
are zebras. This premise relies on the epistemic principle of deductive
closure (DC). In logic, this principle can be formulated as follows:
(1) A knows that P
(2) A knows that P entails Q
(C) A knows that Q
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 59
As regards SH, DC holds that if I do not know that not-D, then it
follows that I do not know O. The principle of deductive closure thus
illustrates that knowledge is closed under logical implication.
Dretske feels obligated to concede the first premise to the skeptics.
Unlike Moore, Dretske maintains that one does not know that one is not
deluded. However, he does not admit that not knowing that not-D neces-
sarily entails not knowing O. This is because he rejects DC, maintaining
instead that DC is only semi-penetrating, and thus does not necessarily
hold in every instance. Dretske believes that by giving up DC we can defeat
the skeptic because SH hinges on deductive entailment.
The denial of the closure principle is an unpopular anti-skeptical
position in contemporary debates. This position has been rejected by
Stine, DeRose, Cohen, and many others, each of whom suggests that
knowledge should remain closed under logical implication. The principal
reason for sustaining DC is that by denying closure Dretske licenses an
abominable conjunction—meaning it is possible to know both that one
sees a zebra (O) while simultaneouslymaintaining that one does not know
that the zebra is not actually a cleverly painted mule (D). Although this
conclusion is clearly counterintuitive, it nonetheless follows if one rejects
DC. Thus, most anti-skeptics advocate retaining DC or (2), refuting SH by
some other method.
General Outline of Contextualism
Two weeks ago my sister went to the doctor for a routine checkup.
Our family physician, Dr. Shan, was measuring my sister’s height and
remarked that she was “quite tall.” Yesterday, my sister decided to become
a model, so she contacted a local modeling agency to set up an appoint-
ment. When she arrived, the recruiter took one look at my sister and said,
“Too short, next!”
Something funny is going on here. My sister did not shrink from the
time of her doctor’s appointment to the time of her appointment with
the modeling recruiter (she remained five feet seven inches), nor was she
wearing different shoes or using any other means of changing her height.
Yet, she was nevertheless tall when at the doctor’s office and short while at
the modeling agency. How can this discrepancy be explained?
60 MICHAELHANNON
Contextualism maintains that the inconsistency in the above sce-
nario is apparent and does not amount to a genuine contradiction. This
example can be explained by examining the environment in which the
words “tall” and “short” were uttered. By paying attention to the role of
context, one can come to understand how the meaning of a word may
change when used in different circumstances. In the case above, the stan-
dards of height are relative to the context in which the claim was uttered,
and the truth-value of a proposition is shaped by a particular context. The
standards in play with regard to height at the doctor’s office were different
from the standards in play at the modeling agency, where the relative stan-
dards of height were more restrictive.
So how does contextualism relate to the skeptical hypothesis? As
mentioned above, SH seems sound. However, SH directly contradicts that
we do allegedly have ordinary knowledge of many things (4), such as having
hands or knowing that zebras are not cleverly painted mules. In order to
resolve this contradiction, the contextualist maintains that our knowledge
of O can have different truth-values in different contexts, since different
contexts call for different standards. For instance, in the case of my sister’s
height, the doctor (S) claimed to know that my sister was tall (O), while the
modeling agent (S) asserted that she was not tall (not-O). The propositions
“S knows O” and “S does not know O” were thus shown to not logically
contradict. Both propositions are correct because of the relative truth-
value of knowledge ascriptions, which are shown to vary cross-contextually.
In a similar vein, contextualism holds that I do not logically contradict
myself when asserting, “I do not know that not-D,” and also assert, “I do
know that O,” so long as the context in which these statements are uttered
prescribes different standards of knowledge. Such standards are more
restrictive in the case of the former, while more liberal standards are in
effect in the latter. Thus, the context of attribution allows for both claims
to be true when uttered in the appropriate context.
Let us briefly consider another example in order to clarify how stan-
dards of knowledge can change in different contexts. Imagine that I have a
roommate named Smith. In all the years I have known Smith, he has
owned the same two pairs of shoes: his running shoes and his dress shoes.
One day I arrive home at 4:30 PMwith a good friend of mine, Jones. Jones
and I enter the house and proceed to the kitchen, where we converse for
several minutes. After a bit of discussion, Jones asks, “Is Smith home?”
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 61
Keep in mind that neither Jones nor I have seen Smith since our recent arrival.
Nevertheless, I peer down the hallway and see both pairs of Smith’s shoes on
the shoe rack, and thus conclude, “Yes, Smith is home.”
In this case, there are relatively relaxed standards of knowledge in
effect. However, consider a second example. Imagine that everything in the
above scenario remains true. But once Jones and I finish our conversation
we decide to go out for dinner. After dinner, Jones and I part company, and
I soon return home. Upon my return, I find that Smith is being arrested
under suspicion of murder. A long-time enemy of Smith’s had been killed
that day, and Smith is the prime suspect. Coincidently, the coroner had
concluded that Smith’s enemy was murdered at 4:30 PM.
At Smith’s trial, the prosecutor puts me on the stand and asks, “Did
you knowthat Smith was home at the time of the murder?” I respond, “Yes.
His only pairs of shoes were in the house at the time, so he had to be
home.” But the lawyer presses, “Is it not it possiblethat Smith had a third pair
of shoes of which you were unaware?” I concede, “Well . . . I suppose it is
possible.” The prosecutor thus remarks, “Aha! So you did not know that
Smith was home!”
My knowledge of Smith’s being home proved insufficient in court.
However, one should not be so quick to assume, as the lawyer does, that I
did not know that Smith was home. Rather, a contextualist would main-
tain that the standards of knowledge have changed. The truth-values of
propositions in a criminal court are more restrictive than those that apply
in more ordinary conversational contexts. As the standards of knowledge
rise, the sphere of epistemically relevant worlds—possible hypothetical
worlds which center around the actual world—increases. In suggesting the
consideration of an alternative hypothesis, e.g., that Smith bought new
shoes, the prosecutor has enlarged the sphere of epistemically relevant
worlds to include the closest world in which my claim that Smith was home
is false. However, the standards of knowledge invoked by the lawyer are not
in place in every context. I did in fact know that Smith was home, in the
context of my conversation with Jones, because seeing Smith’s shoes, cou-
pled with the knowledge that Smith has owned only two pairs of shoes,
satisfied the relatively relaxed epistemic standards in effect. But in men-
tioning a possible alternative, the lawyer has shifted the context to a point
where the truth-value of my claim is now false. But this is not to suggest
62 MICHAELHANNON
that the standards in effect during the criminal court proceeding apply in
all contexts. This is easily demonstrated by pointing to the more liberal
standards in place during a civil court trial. In civil court, what counts as
knowledge is decided on a balance of probabilities, while criminal courts
employ the standard of “beyond reasonable doubt.” As regards SH, con-
textualism maintains that skeptical alternatives are not always epistemically
relevant with respect to all S-knows-that-O claims. Only if SH is a live
hypothesis (e.g., one is debating with a skeptic or engaging in philosophi-
cal reflection) does the claim “S knows O” become false given (1) and (2).
The semantic standards of knowledge are manipulated when one makes
the skeptical argument. Thus, once SH has been raised, more restrictive
epistemic standards are in play, and it is indeed correct to concede that one
does not know not-D and—given DC—therefore does not know O.
One might think that in granting the truth of SH, I concede too
much to the skeptic. The skeptic maintains that the possibility of D infects
all of our ordinary knowledge propositions, not merely knowledge taken at
some unattainably restrictive standard. But I contend that if the skeptic
were to become greedy, if she were to push the argument further by main-
taining that our ordinary empirical claims have therefore always been
wrong, then she goes too far. It is not the case that we did not know O, but
rather that we now do not know O under the unusually restrictive standards
introduced by the skeptic. The skeptic, as an invariantist, wrongly assumes
that the truth-values of knowledge ascriptions are not context-sensitive. In
making this assumption she equivocates. Below I have rewritten SH to
expose the hidden meaning behind the shifts in context.
(1) I do not know that not-D (given the unusually restrictive stan-
dards introduced by SH).
(2) If I do not know that not-D, then I do not know O. (Here,
the skeptic equivocates by shifting the sense of “know,” treating it as
though the word possesses the same meaning cross-contextually.)
(3) Therefore, it is not the case that I know O (which is true only
if SH is in play. But this does not refute my knowing O in more ordi-
nary conversational contexts).
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 63
The point is this: by suggesting that context shapes the meaning of
the word “know,” the skeptic is forced into a position where she cannot
deny that I know O in ordinary conversational contexts. SH is compatible
with claims of ordinary knowledge because they do not logically contradict.
A contradiction presupposes that the meaning of the word is invariant,
but contradictions1can nevertheless take place over different contexts.
Justas my sister can be both tall and short depending on the context, one
can both know O and not know O, relative to the context. Our failure to
see the change in context has thus far prevented our capacity to sustain
O-type knowledge.
Contextualism can thus overcome the difficulties experienced by
both Moore and Dretske. Moore attempted to refute the skeptic by holding
onto the intuitive plausibility of O; however, Moore failed on two counts.
First, he did not account for how he came to know O. Second, he failed to
appreciate the intuitive plausibility of SH, thus resorting to picking and
choosing between premises. What makes contextualism stronger than
Moore’s anti-skeptical position is that it not only demonstrates how we
can know O, it also explains the plausibility of SH. In addition, contextu-
alism maintains the Dretskean idea that one can know both O and not-D
without denying closure and embracing the abominable conjunction. This
is because O is true in ordinary contexts, and not-D is true in contexts
where SH is in play.
There is a persistent concern that in conceding SH, the contextual-
ist also grants that the standards employed by the skeptic are actually the
correctstandards to employ. In the case of Smith’s trial, for instance, it can
be argued that I never knew that Smith was home, but that I simply
thought I knew. Thus, we ought not to ascribe the label “knowledge”
because we do not meet the standards established by the skeptic, which are
the right standards. However, DeRose has provided a convincing response
to this objection. He argues that it is a strike against a theory of a common
term of natural language when the theory implicates the speakers of that
language into a systematic falsehood.2 For example, someone can easily
claim that there are no tall women because tall women are necessarily over
seven feet. By what criteria can we assert that such a position is false, and
1 Here I am referring to alleged, as opposed to genuine, contradictions.
2 I have taken this objection and adapted it from DeRose’s “Solving the Skeptical Problem.”
64 MICHAELHANNON
that one should instead adopt more traditional and less restrictive stan-
dards? After all, our language very well couldhave developed in such a way
that the word “tall” denoted the concept of “over seven feet” rather than
“five feet seven inches.” But the point is that we do not talk about tall
women by this standard, and the persuasiveness of a theory about a term
common in natural language is dependant on how well it accords with
ordinary language. To argue that the skeptical standard of knowledge is in
fact the correct standard would imply that we often talk about knowing
many things (O) that we actually do not know, thus implicating all speak-
ers into a systematic falsehood. We describe women over five feet seven
inches as tall in the same way we consider people to have common knowl-
edge. In virtue of these facts, it is the traditional view, and not the skeptical
view, that is true of our language. The correctness of the traditional view
largely consists in such facts, as they provide us with the best evidence for
accepting the traditional—rather than the skeptical—hypothesis regarding
the semantics of “know.”
Some Reservations About Contextualism
Having outlined the contextualist anti-skeptical argument, I will
express some objections to this position. To my knowledge, these objections
have not yet received adequate treatment. I maintain that if contextualism
is to be considered an adequate response to skepticism, these objections
must be resolved.
First, virtually every defender of contextualism has asserted that we do
know that we are not deluded, according to the ordinary standards of
knowledge. But I am not so convinced. In fact, I think the contextualist can
neverclaim to know not-D, even in the context of less restrictive standards.
It seems that the very consideration of whether or not one knows not-D
implies that SH is in play. However, if the context is such that SH is in play,
then SH necessarily prevents one from knowing not-D. The contextualist
seems to be caught in a contradiction. On one hand, she maintains that
when SH is an active hypothesis we cannot know not-D. On the other
hand, she asserts that we can (ordinarily) know not-D. But the mere con-
sideration of D or not-D seems to imply that SH is in play, thus removing
us from the context of ordinary knowledge claims. The paradox is such
that the very mentioning of D or not-D invokes SH, which further entails
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 65
that we do not know not-D. Yet, if we do not know that not-D, and if the
principle of deductive closure holds, then we do not know O. Even when in
an ordinary context where I know O (thus implying that I know not-D), the
mere mentioning or considering my knowledge of not-D implies that SH is
relevant, thus dissolving my knowledge of O. As a result, we seem to be con-
demned to a position where we can ordinarily know O, which thus implies
that we know not-D, but we can never knownot-D.
Second, contextualism hinges on the notion that context deter-
mines how strong an epistemic certainty one must have for it to count as
knowledge. But in all this talk of context, the contextualists have avoided
proposing any general theory of how exactly context determines the stan-
dard. Furthermore, there is no mention of precisely how one can recognize
shifts in context. Can we recognize a context shift immediately? Are con-
texts only recognizable once we are in them and not from an external
standpoint? In the case of a civil or criminal trial, the standards of knowl-
edge are explicitly outlined. However, this is clearly not the case in the
context of ordinary dialogue between people, where interaction can be
rather ambiguous. Therefore, I think that if contextualism is to be taken
seriously as a solution to skepticism, its defenders must account for how
the standards are shaped by context and how it is possible to recognize a
context. Although this criticism may not be fatal to contextualism, I main-
tain that it needs addressing.
Third, the contextualists conveniently suppress any discussion of
what actually is the casein their talk of context. Imagine that Henry is driv-
ing in the country and is passing a series of barns.3In an ordinary context,
one would rightly assume that the barns in Henry’s visual range are real,
rather than papier-mâché facades. But what if it actually were the case that
some of the barns were fake? Henry would continue driving, unbeknownst
to him that some of the barns he has just passed were papier-mâché. But
would we say that he “knew” the barns were real? It seems clear that the
standards of knowledge were the same, since no skeptical hypotheses were
in play; it just so happened to be the case that a few of the barns were fake.
How would the contextualist respond? It seems to me that the contextual-
ist would maintain that Henry knewall of the barns were real. After all, no
skeptical hypotheses were invoked, since Henry did not contemplate the
3This example is used by Alan Goldman in “What is Justified Belief?”
66 MICHAELHANNON
possible existence of fake barns. Thus, contextualism seems to entail a
peculiar position where Henry knows that the barns are real even though
they are not real, and verifiably so. Consider my previous example regarding
Smith’s trial. The contextualist would argue that I “knew” Smith was
home, given the relatively relaxed standards in place during my conversa-
tion with Jones. But imagine that it was later discovered (say, at his trial)
that Smith had recently bought a third pair of shoes and that he was actu-
ally out killing his enemy at 4:30 PM.If this were true, then could I really
be said to know that he was home, even though he demonstrably was not?
This conclusion is clearly contrary to our ordinary intuitions, and as
DeRose admits, a theory that fails to accord with ordinary language is
likelyfalse.
Last and most significantly, DeRose openly admits that he (and other
contextualists) assume things that they believe but that the skeptic claims
they cannot know. For instance, the claim that O-type beliefs are sensitive
betrays the possibility that he is deluded. Indeed, if he is deluded, then he
does not know that he has hands according to any standards. He can thus
be accused of begging the question against the skeptic. Cohen expresses a
similar worry, where he asserts that his argument begs the question against
skepticism and that he does “not think either side of this dispute can
demonstrate the correctness of its view to the other side.” He argues that
because we are antecedently convinced of the falsity of skepticism, the
semantic version of contextualism can explain away our own “inclinations”
towards skepticism. But the skeptic and the anti-skeptic seem to be stuck
on different hilltops, and are thus incapable of reconciling their opposing
views. Both DeRose and Cohen can only admit that they adamantly believe
that they are not deluded, thereby leaving us in a position no better than
Moore. Contextualism only seems to succeed because it accords with our
ordinary intuitions, which provides the elbowroom required to satisfy
those already unconvinced by skepticism.
I think that to fully refute the skeptic one must do it on one’s own
grounds in the context of restrictive standards. Indeed, when dealing with
highly restrictive standards, we cannot maintain that we know anything. It
is for this reason that contextualism has not been concerned with refuting
the skeptical hypothesis, but rather with pushing it aside and showing it as
irrelevant regarding our ordinary empirical propositions. The contextual-
ist maintains that unless we want the word to mean something that is
ASCRIBINGKNOWLEDGEINCONTEXT 67
impossible to achieve, we must incorporate context into our definition of
knowledge. I have demonstrated that there are several problems with this
theory that must be resolved. Until the contextualists manage to solve
these criticisms or show them irrelevant, epistemologists have not been
given adequate reason to adopt the contextualist solution.
Works Cited
Cohen, Stewart. “Contextualism, Skepticism, and the Structure of
Reasons.” Philosophical Perspectives13 (1999): 57–89.
DeRose, Keith. “Solving the Skeptical Problem.” Skepticism: A Contemporary
Reader. Ed. Keith DeRose and Ted Warfield. Oxford: Oxford UP,
1999. 183–219.
Descartes, Rene. Discourse on Method and Meditations On First Philosophy.
Trans. Donald Cress, USA: Hacket Publishing, 1998.
Dretske, Fred. “Epistemic Operators.” Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader.
Ed. Keith DeRose and Ted Warfield. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999.
131–44.
Feldman, Richard. “Contextualism and Skepticism.” Philosophical Perspectives
33 (1999): 91–114.
Goldman, Alan. “What is Justified Belief?” Justification and Knowledge. Ed.
George S. Pappas. Boston: D. Reidel, 1979. 65–78.
Moore, G.E. “Proof of an External World.” Proceedings of the British Academy
25 (1939). Reprinted in Philosophical Papers. Ed. George Allen and
Unwin: London, 1959.
Nozick, Robert. “Philosophical Explanations.” Skepticism: A Contemporary
Reader. Ed. Keith DeRose and Ted Warfield. Oxford: Oxford UP,
1999. 156–82.
Putnam, Hilary. “Brains in a Vat.” Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader. Ed.
Keith DeRose and Ted Warfield. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999. 27–42.
Stine, Gail. “Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive Closure.”
Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader. Ed. Keith DeRose and Ted
Warfield. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999. 144–55.
Unger, Peter. Philosophical Relativity. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1984.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. On Certainty. London: Harper and Row, 1969.