Aporia vol. 20 no. 1—2010
Plato’s Parmenides:
Interpretations and Solutions to the Third Man
Michael J. hansen
Plato’s Parmenides fulfills a special role in understanding Plato’s the-
ory of Forms. Throughout his dialogues, Plato is pleased to invoke
the theory intermittently, often as ancillary support for related pieces
of his philosophy. But the theory itself remains concealed, even mysteri-
ous, never giving up a broad exposure for the reader’s immediate analysis.
Hence, what we know of Plato’s Forms comes from piecemeal assembly.1
Given this situation, the attacks levied against the Forms in the Parmenides
may reveal vital aspects of the theory and perhaps even betray Plato’s own
misgivings about the Forms. In this paper I will not consider whether Plato
maintained his theory in the face of these critiques. Rather, I will pres-
ent the famous Third-Man Argument from the Parmenides, review some
competing perspectives on the argument among Plato’s interpreters, and
defend Gregory Vlastos’ interpretation due to its historical plausibility.
I. The Third-Man Argument
The Third-Man Argument (hereafter TMA) appears early in the
Parmenides (132A1–B2). It is given in two varieties in the dialogue, but
1 For a comprehensive listing of Plato’s comments regarding the Forms, see “Chapter 28: Form” of
The Great Ideas: A Synopticon of Great Books of the Western World (Vol. II). Encyclopaedia Britan-
nica (1952), 536–41.
Michael Hansen is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University
with minors in logic, linguistics, and ancient near eastern studies. His primary
academic interests include ancient philosophy and philosophy of religon. He will be
applying to graduate programs in the fall. This essay placed third in the 2010 David
H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
66 Michael J. hansen
there is rarely any instructive difference between the first and the sec-
ond formulation. In this section I will formalize Parmenides’ argument
so it can be analyzed apart from the redundancy of the text. My for-
malization is not groundbreaking, and it inherits much of the work from
previous formulations.2
To understand the initial premises of the TMA we need only con-
sult Plato’s arguments for the Forms. First, Parmenides begins with the
principle of Uniqueness. The principle appears in Plato’s One-Over-Many
argument. The basic idea is that when a number of things share a com-
mon property, they do so by virtue of a single Form of that commonality.
However, my wording here may betray certain modern nuances of the
universal-particular relationship, so I will quote from the Parmenides to
establish exactly what Plato has agreed to, which is commonly understood
as Uniqueness:
I suppose you think each form is one on the following
ground: whenever some number of things seem to you to
be large, perhaps there seems to be some one character,
the same as you look at them all, and from that you con-
clude that the large is one. (132A)3
This passage is the final summary of the Forms from the dialogue, and it
appears immediately before Parmenides presents the TMA. We will soon
examine other references to the Forms found earlier in the Parmenides, but
this passage illustrates the Uniqueness premise nicely. I will formalize this
premise in the following way:
(U) If multiple things (a, b, and c) are all F, then
there must be a single Form, F-ness, by which
they exhibit the same quality.
Thus, where multiple things are large, there must be a unified Form of
“Largeness” to account for their commonalty. This is intended to hold for
any quality shared among things: where things are F, there is F-ness.
Second, Parmenides establishes the principle of Participation. The
principle has roots in Plato’s Phaedo where he proposes that “each of
2 My rendering of these premises is modeled after Vlastos’ original formulation of the TMA, with
the added benefit of being informed by subsequent articles responding to his, with only a few of
my own stylistic differences.
3 It is interesting that Plato has allowed such a contextual relation as “large” to represent his Forms
in the above passage, but this is no new development since we read about tall and tallness in the
Phaedo. In fact, it is readily agreed upon that “the theory that Socrates presented at the beginning
of the [Parmenides] is plainly the one developed in Symposium, Phaedo, and Republic” (Cooper
359). For this reason I feel no need to inspect these accounts of the Forms to look for develop-
ments in Plato’s thought in the Parmenides: let us proceed by treating the theory as a mostly stable
target to this point.
Plato’s Parmenides 67
the Forms existed, and that other things acquired their name by having a
share in them” (102B). We find similar summaries of Participation from
the Parmenides in 128E6–129A6, 130B, and 130E5–131A2.4 This estab-
lishes the link between Forms and particulars. Thus, let us formulate the
Participation premise in the following way:
(P) If multiple things (a, b, and c) exhibit F, then
they exhibit that quality through participation
in the Form of F-ness.
There is no need to be suspicious of conflating the appearance of F and the
name of F in (U) and (P) respectively: both regard our account of things in
the world. But it appears that (P) is an extension of (U), then. Notice that
(U) proposes the singleness of F-ness, while (P) supplies the means by which
things exhibit the characteristic F. Plato has distinguished these premises
in his dialogue, but for simplicity’s sake let us collapse (U) and (P) into a
single premise:
(UP) If multiple things (a, b, and c) are all F, then
there must be a single Form, F-ness, by which
they exhibit the same quality through partici-
pation.
However, the above premises are alone insufficient to effect Par-
menides’ conclusion that any given Form is not one, but infinitely many.
The TMA itself requires additional, tacit premises in order to address the
theory of Forms. This is where the TMA becomes especially informative
about Plato’s theory. Because it appears that Plato thought the argument
was a valid one, we are justified in searching out whatever assumptions are
necessary to justify the TMA and how they impact the Forms. The greatest
potential for understanding the dialogue rests somewhere between (UP)
and the conclusion of the TMA. Before we posit any additional premises,
let us first look at the conclusion that Parmenides draws:
What about the large itself and the other large things? If
you look at them all in the same way with the mind’s eye,
again won’t some one thing appear large, by which all
these appear large? . . . .
So another form of largeness will make its appearance,
which has emerged alongside largeness itself and the
things that partake of it, and in turn another over all
4 For those interested in the translations of these passages, Gregory Vlastos treats them in his
article, “Plato’s Third Man Argument” where they appear “annotated copiously, chiefly on matters
dealing with textual points which [he] had failed to cover in previous papers” (290–97).
68 Michael J. hansen
these, by which all of them will be large. Each of your
forms will no longer be one, but unlimited in multitude.
(132A–B)
Here Parmenides appears to have cornered the young Socrates, who had
intended that a unique Form account for a single quality via participation.
If Parmenides’ conclusion follows, we can formalize it thus:
(UP2) If multiple things (a, b, c, and F) are all F,
then there must be a single Form, F-ness
II, by which they exhibit the same quality
through participation.
Notice that F is now included in the list of multiple things. In this case,
Socrates’ demand has failed that F-ness be the unique cause for multiple
things exhibiting F-ness. Parmenides has shown us F-ness II, which has
appeared to explain the new relation, and F-ness III and F-ness IV are not
far off. But Parmenides has been too hasty: (UP2) does not follow directly
from (UP). What is necessary to establish the logical jump from (UP) to
(UP2)? Parmenides never named the tacit premises, so we must explore the
problem for him.
First there is the premise of Self-Predication (hereafter SP). This is
simply the idea that Forms exhibit the very characteristic that they bestow
on the things that participate in them. Thus, largeness is large, tallness is
tall, and any other F-ness is F. And this premise coheres with Plato’s other
writings. His dialogues offer many phrases to support (SP), but their signifi-
cance and meaning is hotly contested.
Second there is the unstated premise of Non-Identity (hereafter NI).
(NI) suggests that if things exhibit a certain quality through participating in
a Form, then these things are not identical to the Form itself. That is, when
Simmias is tall, the Parthenon is tall, and Mount Olympus is tall, none of
these things is identical to Tallness itself.
With these two unstated premises, we can now give a completed for-
mulation of the TMA where Parmenides’ conclusion will follow. Here it is
in short form:
(UP) If a, b, and c are F, then they participate in
the single form F-ness.
(SP) F-ness is F.
(NI) a, b, and c are not F-ness.
(UP2) If a, b, c, and F-ness are F, then they partici-
pate in F-ness II . . .
Where the oneness of F-ness in (UP) is contradicted by F-ness II of (UP2).
Plato’s Parmenides 69
Thus we have a working, formalized TMA. But to fairly assess the ar-
gument we should also note its peculiar context. In the Parmenides, Plato’s
Socrates is a young and budding metaphysician instead of a wise and sea-
soned ethical inquirer. Also unlike typical dialogues, Socrates is not the
central spokesman. Rather, the venerable Parmenides and his student Zeno
develop the body of the dialogue as they question the young Socrates on
points of his metaphysics. After a critique of the young Socrates’ Forms,
Parmenides presents an exhausting philosophical method which Socrates
“must do . . . to achieve a full view of the truth” (136C). These all seem
to indicate that the theory of Forms being attacked by the TMA may be
juvenile at this point, so it is reasonable to ask whether Plato understood a
solution to the criticism he put into Parmenides’ mouth.
II. Solutions to the TMA
Early solutions to the TMA addressed the (SP) premise. Scholars like
Russell,5 Wittgenstein, and Cherniss adopted two senses of predication
in order to weaken (SP) enough to avoid the TMA’s conclusion. This is
done by explaining “is” in two ways: predication and identity. The predica-
tive sense of “is” regards properties of an object. To say, “Socrates is snub-
nosed,” is to describe one of his characteristics: “snub-nosed” is a property
predicate of Socrates. Alternatively, to say “Socrates is the teacher of Plato”
is to assert something about his identity. By parsing “is” in this way, one
can avoid the entanglements of the TMA by holding that UP utilizes the
predicative sense of “is” whereas (SP) uses the identity sense of “is.” This
prevents the shift from (UP) to (UP2) because a, b, and c are F in a differ-
ent sense than F-ness is F, which shouldn’t be conflated to produce the
contradiction of the TMA.
More recently, Gregory Vlastos ignited a new interest in the TMA
with his article “The Third Man Argument in the Parmenides.” He pro-
posed that taking (NI) as an assumption is something of an illegal maneuver
on the part of Parmenides because it is immediately at odds with (SP). The
TMA is supposed to show inconsistency in (UP) and (UP2), but the true
contradiction arrives by importing (NI) together with (SP). Given (SP) (F-
ness is F) and (NI) (If x is F, then x is not identical with F-ness), a simple
substitution for x generates a contradiction: if F-ness is F, then F-ness is not
identical with F-ness. Therefore, Vlastos believes that “one will then see
that these two premises, jointly necessary to the second . . . step of the
5 In fact, Russell credits Plato for the greater part of his theory of universals, saying “Plato’s
‘theory of ideas’ . . . is one of the most successful attempts [at understanding universals] hitherto
made” (90).
70 Michael J. hansen
Argument [(UP2)], are mutually inconsistent” (“Third Man” 325–6). In
this case, the TMA imports its own contradiction to damage (UP), and
does so without needing an infinite regress—all it needs is F-ness II.
In this interpretation, it is vital to consider whether Plato actually ad-
mitted to (SP) and (NI). Although Vlastos believes Plato failed to recognize
the two necessary premises, he believes Plato is still committed to them. He
argues that Plato’s ontology commits him to (SP), “both by his Degrees-of-
Reality Theory and by his Copy-Theory of the relation of things to Forms”
(“Third Man” 336–7). He also notes various appearances of self-predicative
statements throughout Platonic dialogues. But he believes Plato never un-
derstood his own commitments to (SP). Vlastos’ most convincing point
comes from the Form of Change (“Third Man” 339). How could Change
itself change? Wouldn’t that disqualify it from being a Form at all? The
Forms plainly self-predicate, but Plato seems to have missed the upshot of
self-predication for Change.
Vlastos also argues that Plato was ignorantly committed to (NI) due
to his Degrees-of-Reality Theory. The Forms were introduced to explain
the separation between particular things and universals, but the Degrees-
of-Reality Theory frustrates the very distinction it was intended to make:
particulars and universals appear as the same kind, with particulars being
“deficient” in degree of reality. It was a fundamental point for Plato that
the Forms are the most real of anything. This tension appears to be a defect
inherent in the theory of Forms that was unknown to Plato. Since (SP) and
(NI) were inadvertently implied by Plato’s theory of Forms, Vlastos con-
cludes that the TMA represents a “record of honest perplexity” on Plato’s
part (“Third Man” 343).
However, Sellars and Strang responded to Vlastos’ formulation with
a streamlined and more powerful formulation of the TMA. Their reform
occurs in (UP), where they exchange “a single Form” for “at least one Form”
to account for things being F. Thus:
(UP*) If multiple things (a, b, and c) are all F, then
there must be at least one Form, by which
they exhibit the same quality through partici-
pation.
In this case, the infinite regress of the TMA is no longer derived using an
illegal maneuver (previously done by importing already contradictory prem-
ises). (UP*), (SP), and (NI) directly allow for a genuine regress (rather than
the previous contradictory statement F-ness is not F-ness) and reinstate the
argumentative legitimacy of the TMA.
In a later article, Vlastos concedes “that this would be an incom-
parably better argument than the one . . . laid out in [his first article]”
Plato’s Parmenides 71
(“Plato’s” 293). Indeed, Sellars and Strang’s interpretation looks very prom-
ising since the infinite regress is more than a simple “logical bonus.” Ac-
cordingly, Vlastos modifies his formulation of the TMA to reflect certain
aspects of Sellars and Strang’s responses, such as conceding that the TMA
involves an inconsistent triad rather than what he originally thought was
an inconsistent dyad between (SP) and (NI) (“Plato’s,” fn. 300). However,
Vlastos counters Sellars and Strang’s version of (UP*) using a persuasive
textual defense: “our question then is what we are expected to understand
by ‘one’ in this text” (293). He argues that the Parmenides does not allow
for “one” to be rendered as “at least one,” even in ambiguous or inclusive
senses of the phrase. Given this textual constraint, Sellars and Strang have
interesting solutions to the TMA, but they are not available to Plato.
However, K. W. Rankin is not convinced by Vlastos’ textual defense,
and he challenges Vlastos’ defense of (UP) (a single Form) and rejection of
the substitution for (UP)* (at least one Form). Rankin explains, “Vlastos
points out that there is no warrant for any such substitution [of “at least
one”] to be found in any Platonic text. But a modification of the same com-
plaint might be made about his own formulation of [(UP)]” (379). That is,
Rankin believes that Vlastos has no more justification in assuming (UP) (a
single Form) than Sellars and Strang have in assuming (UP*) (at least one
Form). This is because he believes that Vlastos has divined this assumption
where it must be explicitly stated in the Parmenides itself. His position is
something like a loose constructionist’s; when the text gives an argument
with internal tensions like the TMA, readers are justified in accepting in-
terpretations such as (UP*) as long as they are not forbidden by the text.
Thus, “SP and NI require, while the text permits, Vlastos to drop his as-
sumption that it is the function of just one Form to correspond to a given
character” (380).
III. My Rejoinder in favor of Vlastos:
“One” in the Parmenides, contra Rankin
In this section, I will argue that Vlastos’ interpretation is preferable
to any other I have treated in this paper because it maintains the most
responsible procedures for historical philosophy. In regard to Russell, Wit-
tgenstein, and Cherniss, I cannot agree to their set-theoretically informed
solution. However useful it may be to parse “is” into predicate and identity
to avoid the TMA, it is too difficult historically speaking to attribute it to
Plato. It is more likely the result of modern set-theory, which clearly lays
out the differences between identity and predication thanks to logical nota-
tion. I have heard an interesting comparison in the history of long division.
72 Michael J. hansen
Apparently the ancients toiled and repeatedly failed in their attempts to
formalize the process of long division using their complicated numbering
systems. However, after the introduction of an alternative notation (Ara-
bic numerals), long division soon became an elementary school regularity.
Even if Plato had some grasp of the basic difference employed by these
philosophers, I find it historically irresponsible to believe Plato had a suf-
ficiently explicit demarcation to solve his TMA.
Moreover, ancient considerations also point away from the predication-
identity solution. It does violence to Plato’s text to read certain passages
where “is” requires a continuous meaning. Benson Mates has pointed out
a poignant example in the Symposium (225). Here Plato describes various
beautiful things. His discussion builds to a climax with Beauty itself, which
is to be the most beautiful thing one can witness:
This is what it is to go aright, or be led by another, into
the mystery of Love: one goes always upwards for the sake
of this Beauty, starting out from beautiful things and us-
ing them like rising stairs: from one body to two and
from two to all beautiful bodies, . . . to beautiful customs,
. . . to learning, . . . and from these lessons he arrives
in the end at this lesson, which is learning of this very
Beauty, so that in the end he comes to know just what it
is to be beautiful. (211C–D)
Cases like these dot the dialogues and support Vlastos’ understanding
of the Degrees-of-Reality Argument, which only bolsters his reading of
the TMA.
Furthermore, let us assume that Plato did have a fairly evolved con-
cept of predication and identity, one sufficient to avoid the TMA but not
yet approaching the rigor of set-theory. In this case, if Plato did manage to
account for these difficult passages together with his primitive predicate-
identity solution, he would remain strangely silent about it in his reactions
to the TMA in the dialogues. I can’t see anywhere in Plato’s dialogues
where it might be referenced. Plato conscientiously explores possible es-
capes from the TMA in the Parmenides, including considering the Forms
to be “like one and the same day . . . that is in many places at the same time
and is none the less not separate from itself” (131B), or perhaps “each of
these forms is a thought” (132B). These routes are far less potent than the
predication-identity solution. Should we propose that Plato straw-manned
his own theory? The burden of proof appears to fall on explaining why
Plato held back his supposed predication-identity solution in favor of these
weaker attempted solutions. Considering Aristotle’s later persistence in ad-
vancing the argument, such a conclusion seems historically unlikely.
Plato’s Parmenides 73
Vlastos’ treatment also remains superior to that of Sellars and Strang
on historical grounds, despite Rankin’s response. I find Rankin’s accusa-
tion that the text admits to (UP*) to be puzzling, especially in light of the
arguments Vlastos himself offers in favor of his use of ‘oneness’. Consider
Vlastos’ translation of the relevant passage of the Parmenides (132A1–4,
emphasis added):
This, I take it, is what leads you to hold that each Form
is one:
Whenever you think that a number of things are large,
you perhaps think there exists a certain one Form the
same in your view of all of them;
Hence you believe that Largeness is one. (290)
Vlastos points out that the TMA uses the same word in its final sentence:
And so each Form will no longer be one Form for you,
but infinitely many.
Whichever translation we prefer, it must consistently replace “one” in each
of these instances. Thus, if we take Sellars and Strang’s version of (UP*)
seriously, we must also agree that there exists some sort of logical trouble in
Parmenides’ conclusion: “each Form will no longer be at least one for you,
but infinitely many.” But what distress would there be in that conclusion?
There is nothing disconcerting or contradictory about “at least one” in
competition with “infinitely many.” Surely, this would be to misunderstand
the TMA. It appears that even if we grant Sellars and Strang their proposed
translation, the TMA would produce a rather anticlimactic conclusion.6
Due to these textual facts, I prefer Vlastos’ treatment of the TMA
over that of Sellars, Strang, and Rankin. As long as we are engaged in
historical philosophy, it is only prudent to demand historically plausible ex-
planations. If we admit to non-historical explorations of the theory, such as
predication and identity or (UP*), we have abandoned the original project.
Worse, we must propose that the Parmenides either straw-mans the theory
of Forms or reaches a harmless conclusion. As historical problems go, the
TMA calls for additional caution because it asks the reader to identify as-
sumptions to generate its conclusion, which affords all sorts of opportunity
to unnecessarily depart from the real problem. If we are to solve the general
problem of third-men, we ought to consult reason itself without reference
texts whatsoever.
6 Vlastos’ interpretation of one also benefits from passages beyond the Parmenides. See R. 276A,
507B, and 596A. See also Parm. 131A8–9, 132B5, and 132C3–4.
74 Michael J. hansen
I prefer to think of the TMA as a great moment of humility from
one of history’s greatest philosophers. Instead of a mysterious dialogue that
holds secrets to Plato’s genius, it is more likely a mysterious dialogue that ex-
presses his willingness to admit to his limits. Such commitments to truth
and exploration have been shared by great philosophers throughout the
great conversation. When Russell pointed out the flaw in Frege’s rule V,
Frege responded as gracefully as Plato’s self-criticism from the Parmenides.
When Russell reflected on Frege’s response to his critique, he has this
to say:
As I think about acts of integrity and grace, I realise
that there is nothing in my knowledge to compare with
Frege’s dedication to truth. His entire life’s work was on
the verge of completion, much of his work had been ig-
nored to the benefit of men infinitely less capable, his
second volume was about to be published, and upon
finding that his fundamental assumption was in error, he
responded with intellectual pleasure clearly submerging
any feelings of personal disappointment. It was almost
superhuman and a telling indication of that of which
men are capable if their dedication is to creative work
and knowledge instead of cruder efforts to dominate and
be known. (Heijenoort 127)
Similarly, Plato managed to object to his own central theory of Forms
using the most potent methods available in his day. Though he failed to
see his own commitments, I suspect he sensed a problem and graciously
explored it in the Parmenides at his own expense.
In conclusion, I have shown how Parmenides’ TMA relies on (UP),
(SP), and (NI) to attack Plato’s theory of Forms. I have then summarized
various treatments of the TMA, including predication and identity, Vlas-
tos’ position that (SP) and (NI) immediately contradict each other due to
Plato’s inadvertent ontology, Sellars and Strang’s modification of (UP*)
to revive the TMA, Vlastos’ textual refutation of that modification, and
Rankin’s rejoinder. I have concluded that Vlastos’ interpretation is supe-
rior to all others presented here because it remains the most historically
responsible and appropriately pays the honor of humility to Plato.
Works Cited
Cooper, J.M. Introduction. “Parmenides.” Plato: Complete Works. Trans.
Mary Louise Gill, and Paul Ryan. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997.
Heijenoort, Jean van. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic: 1879-1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1967.
Mates, Benson. “Identity and Predication in Plato.” Phronesis: A Journal of
Ancient Philosophy 24 (1979): 211-29.
Plato. Plato: Complete Works. Ed. J. M. Cooper, and D. S. Hutchinson.
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997.
Rankin, K. W. “Is the Third Man Argument an Inconsistent Triad?”
Philosophical Quarterly 20 (October, 1970): 378–80.
Russell, Bertrand. “The World of Universals.” Problems of Philosophy.
Oxford University Press, 1967. 90–99.
Vlastos, Gregory. “Plato’s Third Man Argument (Parm. 132a1–B2): Text
and Logic.” The Philosophical Quarterly 19.77 (1969): 289–301.
———. “The Third Man Argument in the Parmenides.” Philosophical Review
63 (1954): 319–49.
Works Consulted
Allen, R. E. “Participation and Predication in Plato’s Middle Dialogues”
Plato: A Collection of Critical Essays. Ed. Gregory Vlastos. New York:
Double Day, 1970. 167–83.
Cresswell, M. J. “Participation in Plato’s Parmenides.” Southern Journal of
Philosophy 13 (Summer, 1975): 163–71.
Politis, Vasilis. “Anti-Realist Interpretations of Plato: Paul Natorp.”
International Journal of Philosophical Studies 9.1 (2001): 47–61.
Strang, Colin. “Plato and the Third Man.” Plato: A Collection of Critical
Essays. Ed. Gregory Vlastos. New York: Double Day, 1970. 184–200.
Teloh, Henry. “Parmenides and Plato’s Parmenides 131a–132c.” Journal of
the History of Philosophy 14 (April, 1976): 125–30.