Aporia vol. 20 no. 1—2010
Aristotle on Universal Subjects
Chandler hatCh
A ristotle’s Categories has profound implications for his ontology and
his logic. He argues that not everything exists in the same way,
and that not every predicate is used in the same way. He distin-
guishes ten categories of being, nine of which depend upon the first,
substance, for their being. Furthermore, Aristotle distinguishes prima-
ry substances (particulars) from secondary substances (universals). As with
non-substantial categories, secondary substances depend on primary sub-
stances for their existence: “everything except primary substances is either
predicated of primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did
not exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist” (Cat. 2b4–6).
Things of non-substantial categories (accidents), such as qualities, quanti-
ties, or relations, derive their being from their “presence in” substances.
Given that accidents have only a secondary existence deriving from their
presence in substance, what does it mean to talk about them? For example,
when we talk about “red,” are we talking about a color, or are we merely
talking about the substances in which redness is present? If reality is fun-
damentally primary substance, it would appear that in speaking of the color
we are merely speaking of red substances, but when we speak of redness we
intuitively feel that we are referring primarily to redness itself, as a univer-
sal, and only secondarily to red objects. To frame this question, I will take
a detour to establish a relationship between language, logic, and ontology,
both in Aristotle and in modern logic.
Chandler Hatch is a senior majoring in philosophy Brigham Young University with
minors in Russian and Chinese. His interests include logic, philosophy of language,
philosophy of the social sciences, and philosophy of education. In the fall of 2010 he
will be entering the Chinese Flagship program at Brigham Young University. This
essay placed first in the 2010 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
2 Chandler hatCh
Language, Logic, and Ontology
Aristotle adapted language to match his ontology. Already in the
Categories, and still further in his later logical treatises (see below), Aristo-
tle ties his ontological distinction of substance and accident to language:
“substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the word,
is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present in a subject”
(Cat. 2a11–13). Here Aristotle describes substance in terms of its linguistic
role. Primary substance is never a predicate. It may seem here that Aris-
totle is taking ontological cues from language. However, as a definition
of substance, this statement from the Categories is inadequate. Consider
for example the linguistically well-formed sentence “The white thing is a
man.” Here “man” is the predicate, and “white thing” is the subject; yet
“man” is the substance and “white” is the accident. Aristotle refers to this
kind of predication, in which linguistic roles appear ontologically reversed,
as “accidental” predication. In saying that substances are never predicated
of anything, Aristotle is not defining substance in terms of linguistic use.
Just the opposite—he is establishing a proper way of speaking, a sort of logic
to match ontology.
Aristotle appeals to other linguistic distinctions to separate substance
from accident. For example, he distinguishes between synonymous and
homonymous predication. Secondary substances are synonymously pred-
icated of primary substances because wherever a secondary substance is
predicated of a primary substance, the definition of that secondary sub-
stance may also be predicated of primary substance. The same is not true
of accidents, which are homonymously predicated of substances: “when a
thing is present in a subject [an accident], though the name may quite well
be applied to that in which it is present, the definition cannot be applied”
(Cat. 3a15–17). For example, a log is white in a different sense than a log is
wood. If we substitute a definition of “white,” “a color with x properties,”
into the sentence, “That log is white,” we get a false sentence: “That log is
a color with x properties.” A log is not a color, it has a color. However,
if we substitute a definition of “wood” into the sentence, “That log is
wood,” we get a true sentence: “That log is dead tree matter.” Aristotle says
that the second substitution succeeds where the first fails because in the
first, an accident is said to be IN a substance (predicated homonymously),
whereas in the second, a substance is SAID-OF a substance (that is, predi-
cated synonymously) (Cat. 3a15–17). Yet, as Frank Lewis points out in a de-
tailed and technical analysis of synonymous predication, synonymy cannot
distinguish accident from substance because it “presupposes the distinction
between the IN and SAID-OF relations” (63). Aristotle’s notion of defini-
tion is, after all, built on his notion of categories, and furthermore, to say,
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 3
“A log is not a color, it has a color,” is already to distinguish between being
and having, a distinction that Plato, for whom being is having, would dis-
agree with (Lewis 61).
In short, Aristotle’s doctrine of predication cannot be understood
as a derivation of metaphysics from grammar. Rather, Aristotle is doing
just the opposite. He is developing a more scientific, logical language to
reflect his metaphysics. As Allan Bäck describes it, “Aristotle distinguishes
substance and accident, universal and singular, but has forced the same
structure onto his technical protocol Greek. The language reflects the on-
tology” (173). This process of restructuring language to match ontology is
part of Aristotle’s development of logic.
A similar connection between ontology and logic is evident in modern
logic. Predicate logic translates natural language into symbols that capture
the meaning of a sentence in a precise way so that it can be traced to its
implications. The way we reduce natural language to symbols has ontologi-
cal implications. Writing “is red” as the upper-case predicate letter “R,” for
example, shows that redness is a universal. But because “R” is a predicate
letter, it cannot be the subject of another predicate letter. A question then
arises: how do we talk about the color red? Perhaps we choose the lower-
case “r” for the subject “red,” but in that case, we seem to commit ourselves
to realism, the notion that red, a universal, exists. Furthermore, how then
do we show the relationship between “r” and “R,” between “red” and “is
red?” If, on the other hand, we want to restrict universals to being predi-
cates and particulars to being subjects, then we seem to be affirming that
only particulars exist. For that matter, while some philosophers have as-
serted existence to be a predicate (e.g., anyone who takes the ontological ar-
gument for God’s existence seriously), note that in modern logic, existence
is not a predicate but a quantifier. This implies that being red, owning a
dog, and laughing all have something in common that distinguishes them
from existing (namely, that the former are predicates). Whether or not we
are satisfied with the ontology our logic implies, our logic and our ontology
reflect each other.
The same was true for Aristotle’s refinement of language, and in
his case, logic was consciously designed to reflect ontology. Although the
Aristotelian language I am investigating was not as technically precise as
symbolic logic, both exhibit a strong connection between ontology and syn-
tax. Aristotle pared down the many ways of expressing propositions to one
scientific form that most accurately reflects reality. Because substance is
ultimate reality in Aristotle’s ontology, it makes sense for substance to oc-
cupy a unique position in scientific syntax.
One final example of the relationship between language and ontol-
ogy will be important in figuring out whether we talk about red or red
4 Chandler hatCh
things. Aristotle used the copula (in English, the verb “to be” when used
to express a link between subject and predicate) very differently from the
way we now use it. Whereas now the copula is not understood to imply
existence, the Aristotelian copula always implied existence. As Allan Bäck
argues, “a standard Aristotelian subject-predicate sentence (one of tertium
adiacens) of the form, ‘S is P’, is to be read as ‘S is existent as a P’. So, for
example, ‘Socrates is (a) man’ is to be read as ‘Socrates is existent as a man’”
(2). Because the Aristotelian copula is always at the same time an asser-
tion of existence, it always insinuates an ontological thesis. The sentence
“Unicorns are animals” is false in Aristotelian logic because unicorns do
not exist. If the subject of the Aristotelian copula is always asserted to exist,
then it is natural that primary substance, that substance whose being
is most independent and original, should be the ontological subject of
any logical statement.
Gyekye’s Thesis
Whether we talk about red or red things is a question of how we
understand universal and particular subjects. Traditional logic allows for
universal subjects, whereas modern logic does not. For example, in modern
predicate logic, “Socrates is pale” might be symbolized Ps, while “English-
men are pale” would be symbolized (x)(Ex ⊃ Px). The former expression is
simple predication, while the latter is a conditional that makes both subject
and object universal predicates. The syntax of predicate logic implies that
universals are always predicates. Ostensibly, this is because universals are
not ultimate reality. Ultimate reality consists of particulars. As propo-
nents of modern logic have it, ancient logicians were fooled by the parallel
structure of singular and plural predication into thinking that they were
of one form. In reality, modern logicians would say, universals are not
predicated of universals.
Kwame Gyekye has argued that although this criticism of ancient
logic may be correct, Aristotle’s views on this issue are actually closer to the
modern conception than to so-called ancient logic: “according to Aristotle’s
doctrine of categories . . . a universal term, like piety, does not exist inde-
pendently but inheres in a primary substance (i.e., an individual) and is
ontologically dependent upon it; such a term is thus, in a Fregean-Russellian
language, an incomplete symbol” (“Modern” 615). Aristotle recognized that
universals are dependent for their existence on individuals. In this ontol-
ogy, Gyekye argues, Aristotle implies what predicate logic makes explicit:
predicating universals of universals is really just shorthand for predicating
universals of particulars. “Englishmen are pale” is shorthand for “There
exist particular Englishmen, and they are pale.”
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 5
Gyekye supports his argument with lines from the Metaphysics in
which Aristotle expresses doubt as to whether accidents can properly be
said to exist:
One might even raise the question whether the words
“to walk,” “to be healthy,” “to sit” imply that each of
these things is existent, and similarly in any other case
of this sort; for none of them is either self-subsistent or
capable of being separated from substance, but rather, if
anything, it is that which walks or sits or is healthy that is
an existent thing. (1028a20–25)
Here, Aristotle is flirting with the idea that only substances exist. Recalling
what Bäck showed about the Aristotelian copula, we see that if accidents
don’t exist, then sentences whose subjects are accidents are ill-formed be-
cause they assert that accidents exist. Therefore, to speak of accidents is
more properly to speak of the substances in which accidents are present.
Aristotle goes on:
Now these are seen to be more real because there is some-
thing definite which underlies them (i.e., the substance
or individual), which is implied in such a predicate; for
we never use the word “good” or “sitting” without imply-
ing this. (1028a25–29)
Here, Aristotle seems to spell out Gyekye’s case explicitly. Any use of a
universal implies a more real substance or individual that underlies it. If
our language is to precisely reflect reality, then, it is individuals, not univer-
sals, that ought to serve as subjects. Thus, while Aristotle did not invent
predicate logic, his ontology implies modern logic’s treatment of “univer-
sal subjects.”
Gyekye points out that Aristotle’s doctrine of predication is based
on his ontology. Ousia, used synonymously with hypokeimenon, refers both
to the ontological notion of substance and to the logical subject. Given
that primary substances are particulars, particulars ought to serve as the
subjects of sentences: “the real subject of a proposition must always be
a substrate, that is, an individual, a complete symbol” (“Modern” 616).
Gyekye compares Aristotle to Strawson, who points out that even though
predicates like “generosity” and “prudence” seem to be subjects of sen-
tences, they are predicates, and therefore cannot be the subjects of other
predicates (“Modern” 616). Rather, they require a particular subject.
Ontologically speaking, this is precisely how Aristotle views universals.
Therefore, Gyekye concludes, the modern criticism of ancient logic does
not apply to Aristotle.
6 Chandler hatCh
Gyekye’s analysis of Aristotle’s logic can be summed up in the follow-
ing argument:
(1) In Aristotle’s ontology, particulars are primary
reality, upon which all universals depend for
existence.
(2) Modern predicate logic analyzes all propositions
about universals into propositions about par-
ticulars.
∴ (3) Predicate logic provides a good model for
Aristotle’s ontology.
If we add to this summation of Gyekye’s argument our previously defended
thesis that Aristotle’s logic was designed to match his ontology, it seems
reasonable to conclude that Aristotle would have agreed with the predi-
cate logic analysis of universal subjects. Predicate logic, far from making a
distinction that Aristotle failed to notice, merely found a way to express
symbolically what Aristotle had always affirmed, that statements about
universals are shorthand for more ontologically accurate statements
about particulars.
Metaphysical Complications
George Englebretsen responded with a harsh critique of Gyekye’s
thesis: “it was an unwarranted dogma of contemporary logic that all
predications must be to a singular subject . . . Now K. Gyekye has at-
tempted to foist this dogma upon Aristotle himself” (614). The problem,
Englebretsen asserts, is that Gyekye confuses a sentence’s meaning with
its truth conditions.
Gyekye argues that Aristotle’s analysis of the statement “Piety is a
virtue” is best symbolized (∃x)(Px & Vx) (“Modern” 616).1 But this sym-
bolic sentence really says either “There is something that is pious and virtu-
ous,” or “There is something that is piety and a virtue” (Englebretsen 614).
Gyekye seems to think the former is the correct reading, given that the latter
1 Gyekye considers using a universal quantifier, but rejects it because a universally quantified con-
ditional doesn’t imply the existence of any individuals that satisfy either the antecedent or the
consequent (“Modern” 617). However, Gyekye fails to notice a flaw in his proposed existential
quantifier: the existence of one individual satisfying both predicates does not show that piety is
a virtue on any account of universals. Gyekye’s “(∃x)(Px & Vx)” merely asserts that at least one
person who is pious is virtuous. I take it that what Gyekye intended to say was both that all pious
beings are virtuous and that at least one pious being exists, which he might have written as
(x)(Px → Vx) & (∃x)(Px).
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 7
reading implies that piety is a particular, contra Gyekye’s thesis. Presum-
ably, the “something” that is pious and virtuous is a particular human. In that
case, Englebretsen affirms, Gyekye is confusing “pious” with “piety”: “pious” is
a predicate; “piety” is a universal subject. Gyekye equates “Piety is a virtue” with
“Something pious is virtuous.” But when we say that piety is a virtue, we are not
speaking about things that are pious; we are speaking about piety itself.
For Aristotle, for piety to exist there must be something that is pi-
ous. That is, piety must adhere in some substance. Our assertion about
piety certainly has ontological implications, Englebretsen admits, but these
implications are truth conditions, not the meaning itself (615). Gyekye is
right to assert that “something pious is virtuous” is a truth condition of the
sentence, but he is wrong to assert that it is the meaning of the sentence.
To see this more clearly consider the following necessary implication.
If I say, “My grandmother’s funeral is on Wednesday,” I imply that she
died. It is necessary that she died in order for the event on Wednesday to be
her funeral, but that doesn’t mean that “My grandmother died” is any part
of the meaning of “My grandmother’s funeral is on Wednesday.” Rather,
the former is a truth condition for the latter. Of course, the distinction be-
tween truth condition and meaning is far more subtle in the case of “Piety
is a virtue” because the distinction between talking about piety and pious
people is an ontological distinction we seldom fuss about in quotidian lan-
guage. Nevertheless, Englebretsen claims, there is a distinction.
The confusion arises from thinking that when we speak of “piety” we
are speaking of “pious beings.” “The basic problem here is that in ordinary
discourse we wish sometimes to talk about things, individuals in terms
of their properties and other times we want to talk of those properties
themselves” (Englebretsen 615). Speaking of piety and speaking of pious
people are connected by ontological implication, according to Aristotle,
but they are not semantically equivalent: “while we may be committed to
whatever our sentences imply, we do not mean those implications by our
sentences” (Englebretsen 615).
As another illustration, Englebretsen considers the sentence “Ameri-
can Indians are disappearing.” This sentence implies that individual
American Indians exist, but if we try to logically reduce it to a sentence
about individuals, we exchange the meaning of the sentence for inappro-
priate truth conditions. That the American Indians are disappearing “does
not mean (contra Gyekye) that some American Indian is disappearing”
(Englebretsen 615). By parity with Gyekye’s analysis of “Piety is a virtue” as
(∃x)(Px & Vx), Gyekye’s analysis of “American Indians are disappearing”
would be (∃x)(Ax & Dx): there is an American Indian, and he is disappearing.
But to say that the group is disappearing is certainly not to say that each
individual is disappearing! This sentence does not even seem to admit of a
8 Chandler hatCh
faithful ontological reduction in terms of particulars because the verb “dis-
appearing” cannot have the same meaning when applied to individuals.
Englebretsen makes a compelling case against logical reduction to
individuals. He points out critical flaws in a logical reduction of univer-
sal subjects to individual subjects. However, he makes almost no appeals
to Aristotle’s writings themselves. The one appeal Englebretsen makes to
Aristotle is to identify a discrepancy between the Aristotelian and modern
interpretations of particulars, not universals: “there is no such class as the
class of just things (cf. An. Post. 92b14ff). Every individual is some sort of
thing” (Englebretsen 615). In other words, the problem with modern predi-
cate logic is that in “(∃x)(Px & Vx),” the particular is simply “x,” a thing.
Aristotle’s particular is not a thing, but always a sort of thing: a man, a tree,
or a dog. This argument points out a discrepancy that Gyekye hasn’t men-
tioned, but it doesn’t get at the heart of Gyekye’s argument. It is merely
a tangential argument against a conflation of Aristotelian ontology and
modern logic, separate from Englebretsen’s main attack on making all uni-
versals into predicates. Thus, though Englebretsen admirably distinguishes
meaning from implications, he doesn’t ever show that Aristotle would have
agreed with him. Englebretsen’s argument involves a suppressed premise,
that Aristotle was too smart to have succumbed to this “dogma.”
Support for Gyekye
Contra Englebretsen’s suppressed premise, interpretations of mod-
ern Aristotle scholars and further passages from Aristotle seem to confirm
Gyekye’s thesis. For example, D. W. Hamlyn, in his article “Aristotle on Pred-
ication,” points out a relevant passage from the Posterior Analytics:
I assume first that predication implies a single subject
and a single attribute, and secondly that predicates which
are not substantial are not predicated of one another. We
assume this because such predicates are all coincidents,
and though some are essential coincidents, others of a
different type, yet we maintain that all of them alike are
predicated of some substratum and that a coincident is
never a substratum—since we do not class as a coincident
anything which does not owe its designation to its be-
ing something other than itself, but always hold that any
coincident is predicated of some substratum other than
itself. (83b17–24)
About this passage Hamlyn writes, “it would follow also, although Aristotle
does not draw the consequence, that it is impossible to give definitions
of qualities . . . a view which would also demand drastic amendments to
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 9
the account of synonymous and homonymous predication” (122). Hamlyn
does not mention Gyekye (his article predates Gyekye’s), but his position
supports Gyekye’s thesis. Aristotle explicitly says that accidents are never
predicated of one another (presumably he speaks of scientific language, for
counterexamples abound in casual language). Thus, to use ontologically
accurate language, in logic, just as Gyekye argued, accidents are never sub-
jects. Hamlyn points out that with this doctrine Aristotle undermines an
important aspect of his own philosophy, namely, that without formulating
propositions about accidents, Aristotle can’t define accidents. Nevertheless,
Hamlyn acknowledges that Aristotle is taking a position in conformity with
Gyekye’s thesis. Aristotle seems to unwittingly make universals indefinable
by saying that universals are not the proper subjects of predication.2
Of course, one might still think it was possible to define accidents in
scientific language by translating casual language definitions into scientific
language. We could define piety in casual language as the virtue of being
loved by the gods, but to express the same thought with particulars as the
subject we would have to say something like “Pious beings are virtuous
and are loved by the gods.” But that statement may be true whether or not
there is a necessary connection between piety and virtue or between piety
and being loved by the gods. Perhaps by chance in 2010 all pious beings are
virtuous, but next year an impious, virtuous being will come into existence.
Thus, the scientific expression of our casual definition of piety fails to de-
fine piety. Furthermore, adding “necessarily” to this sentence won’t solve
the problem either, because for Aristotle, definitions are a question not
just of necessity, but of essence. It may be a necessary property of heat that
it can boil water, but heat is not defined in terms of the power to boil wa-
ter. Thus, Gyekye’s thesis seems to make all accidents indefinable because
statements about particulars, even statements of necessity, don’t suffice to
define accidents. That, in turn, makes Aristotle’s distinction between syn-
onymous and homonymous predication impossible because the distinction
depends on definitions, and definitions of accidents are impossible.
Similarly, Frank Lewis, who makes no mention of Englebretsen or
Gyekye in his book Substance and Predication in Aristotle, interprets Aristo-
tle’s Categories in Gyekye’s favor. Lewis elucidates 2a36–2b1 as follows:
In general, I take it, he is offering a reductive account of
certain kinds of (metaphysical) predication, such that the
various (metaphysical) predications his scheme allows that
do not obviously have an individual substance as subject
are to be analysed in terms of (metaphysical) predications
2 Thus, when Aristotle defines virtue as “a state of character concerned with choice, lying in a
mean” (Eth. Nic.1106b36–1107a1), he violates his own rule against using accidents as subjects.
10 Chandler hatCh
that do. Accordingly, animal is predicated of man only
because there is some individual substance of which
both animal and man are predicated. (65–66)
Lewis’s “metaphysical predication” refers to Aristotle’s ontologically proper
language. Lewis’s words could not be more explicit in defense of Gyekye
without citing Gyekye: universal predications can be analyzed down to
the level of individual substance. Thus, both Hamlyn and Lewis support
Gyekye’s reading.
Harmonizing Aristotle with Aristotle
It now seems that the debate is less a battle between Englebretsen and
Gyekye over Aristotle, and more a battle between Englebretsen and Aristo-
tle over metaphysics and logic. Englebretsen insists that we are able to speak
about universals, but Aristotle seems to exclude universal subjects from
scientific speech. To further complicate the matter, Aristotle’s position con-
tradicts itself by making it impossible to define universals, undermining his
own distinction between synonymous and homonymous predication.
Of course, in his early works, Aristotle makes explicit allowance for
universals to fall as species under group classifications. For example, he
writes in the Categories that “other things, again, are both predicable of a
subject and present in a subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the
human mind, it is predicable of grammar” (1a30–1b2). Here grammar
is allowed to be the subject for a predicate even though grammar is not
a substance, but something that is present in many subjects. But in the
Posterior Analytics, Aristotle seems to retract that provision by forbidding
universals to serve as subjects: “predicates which are not substantial are not
predicated of one another” (83b17–18). In the statement “Grammar is
knowledge,” neither grammar nor knowledge is substantial, and therefore
neither should be the subject of a scientific proposition. This is a contra-
diction within Aristotle. Of course, we could excuse Aristotle from this
contradiction by saying that in the Categories he was not speaking scientifi-
cally, a likely hypothesis given that it was a very early work, but we still have
to deal with Englebretsen’s argument for the meaning-implication distinction
and with the impossibility of scientifically defining universals.
What prompted Aristotle to make this assertion in the Posterior Ana-
lytics? He needed it to eliminate infinite chains of predication: “subject to
these assumptions then, neither the ascending nor the descending series of
predication in which a single attribute is predicated of a single subject is in-
finite” (An. Post. 83b24–26). In other words, if a predicate can be predicated
of a predicate, there’s nothing to stop the chain from going on infinitely.
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 11
“If it does not terminate, and beyond any predicate taken as higher than
another there remains another still higher, then every predicate is demon-
strable. Consequently, since these demonstrable predicates are infinite in
number and therefore cannot be traversed, we shall not know them by dem-
onstration” (An. Post. 84a1–6). An infinite chain of predication is thus an
epistemological problem rather than an ontological problem. Aristotle sees
disallowing accidents to be proper subjects as the most reasonable way to
prevent an infinite chain of predication.
If Aristotle allows predication, or more specifically definition, to go
on infinitely, then he must abandon his foundationalist epistemology.
Aristotle wants universal accidents to be incapable of serving as subjects be-
cause he wants there to be some indefinable, primitive terms. These terms
do not need definition because they are given by the nous. The universals
constitute what is most knowable without qualification, while the particulars
are only most knowable to man (An. Post. 72a1–3). To get true knowledge,
then, one must define particulars in terms of what is most knowable, uni-
versals. But if definitions keep going backward infinitely, the gap between
particular and universal will never be bridged. Certain indefinable uni-
versals must serve as first principles or there will be an infinite regress of
explanation, which is no explanation at all. In this passage of the Posterior
Analytics, Aristotle makes the sweeping claim, supported by his ontology,
that no accidents can be subjects so as to forestall epistemological disaster.
Thus, not only Aristotle’s ontology, but also Aristotle’s epistemology, seems
committed to substances as logical subjects.
Note that Aristotle would not deny that one can say “Literacy is
knowledge of letters.” In fact, at some points he seems to imply such defi-
nitions of universals. But in the Posterior Analytics (83b17–24), Aristotle
seems to say that this is not a scientific definition. There are two problems
with this definition for scientific language: an ontological problem and an
epistemological problem. The ontological problem is that the subject, “lit-
eracy,” is an accident, not a substance. Therefore, the subject does not exist
in the fullest sense. Accidents like literacy, walking, sitting, or being healthy
are not “self-subsistent or capable of being separated from substance, but
rather, if anything, it is that which walks or sits or is healthy that is an ex-
istent thing” (Met. 1028a23–25). As Bäck pointed out, the subject of the
sentence must exist. Therefore, it would be more appropriate to reword
this sentence so that the subject is a substance, a real “existent thing.”
The scientific form of this definition would reflect the ontology in the
proposition “Literate men have knowledge of letters.” Literacy’s existence
is questionable, says Aristotle, but literate men certainly exist. But “Literate
men have knowledge of letters” is no longer a definition. Therefore, Aristotle’s
ontology seems to militate against the scientific definitions of universals.
12 Chandler hatCh
The second problem with this definition is epistemological. If we al-
low every universal to be defined, the definitions will continue infinitely.
If you don’t know what at least some words mean, then definitions won’t
provide you with any knowledge. Unless you know what “rational” and
“animal” mean, “man is the rational animal” will tell you nothing. You will
now have to seek definitions of “rational” and “animal,” and unless there
are some first principles you know without definition, those definitions
will send you searching for still more definitions, and so on infinitely. Aris-
totle reasons that the easiest way to cut off the infinite chain of definitions
is to make accidents indefinable. We know what they mean not by finding
their definition, but by intuition, nous. This epistemological cutoff matches
the ontological cutoff elegantly.
Harmonizing Aristotle with Englebretsen
To sum up the argument, we will either need to tweak Aristotle’s
epistemology and ontology or reject Englebretsen’s meaning-implication
distinction and make it impossible to define universals. In the face of these
strong arguments, I can only tentatively offer the solution that I believe
most truly matches Aristotle’s philosophy: allow accidents to be subjects
of propositions by modifying Aristotle’s ontological and epistemological
claims. This solution reconciles the opposing sides with minimal changes
to Aristotle’s philosophy.
To resolve the epistemological problem, we need merely to give up
Aristotle’s insistence that the chain of predication ends with the first ac-
cident. It is true that the chain cannot go on infinitely if we are to have a
foundationalist epistemology, but that doesn’t mean that we need to stop
with accidents. First principles will make themselves known as they are
discovered. Some accidents may turn out to be first principles, while others
may not. For example, weight seems not to be a most knowable universal,
but a universal definable in terms of other universals, the force of gravity
and mass. In this case, science has found a suitable definition for “weight.”
Quantity, however, seems to have resisted further definition: “four” seems
to be a primitive accident. Aristotle doesn’t need to arbitrarily cut off defi-
nition at the accidental level to prevent an infinite regress. The proper
cut-off point will be determined by the explanatory needs of the relevant
science. Therefore, his epistemology can survive a change in his doctrine
of predication.
The ontological claim is more tenacious. Aristotle is stuck between
a Platonic realism that he detests and a nominalism he seems equally wary
of. This conflict comes out in Metaphysics VII–VIII. Because Aristotle
aristotle on Universal sUbjeCts 13
recognizes universals as most knowable, his attempt to reduce all universals
to particulars has the uncomfortable consequence of reducing what is ab-
solutely most knowable to what is least knowable: “if then demonstration
is of necessary truths and definition is a scientific process . . . clearly there
can neither be definition of nor demonstration about sensible individuals”
(Met. 1039b31–1040a2). To substitute particulars for universal terms is, in
a sense, to substitute what is unknowable for what is knowable.3 If we can
only speak about particulars, no demonstration, definition, or knowledge
is possible at all, for individual substances “have matter whose nature is
such that they are capable both of being and of not being; for which reason
all the individual instances of them are destructible” (Met. 1039b29–31).
There can be no knowledge of what can either be or not be. Here episte-
mology seems to dictate that universals exist in some sense. Otherwise,
there can be no knowledge.
Knowledge of universals constitutes true knowledge. Universals de-
pend on particulars for their existence, but that doesn’t mean that they are
nothing but a substitute name for the particulars; if they were, they would
be no more knowable than the particulars they comprise. That the univer-
sal depends for its being upon the being of particulars does not deprive
it of its own being. Therefore, statements about universals are not to be
understood as statements about particulars, but as statements about uni-
versals with certain implications for particulars (e.g., implications for the
truth values of statements about particulars). The dependent being of uni-
versals is still a sort of being, and therefore a logic that acknowledges their
being without reducing it to the being of particulars is compatible with
Aristotle’s ontology.
My guess about the resolution Aristotle would favor can only be as
conclusive as Aristotle’s ontology, epistemology, and metaphysics. Unfor-
tunately, Aristotle’s metaphysics is notoriously inconsistent, or at the very
least, notoriously difficult to interpret as consistent. However, this modifi-
cation and interpretation of Aristotle’s views seems to do the least violence
to his philosophy. It maintains his foundationalist epistemology and his
particular-oriented ontology while accommodating Englebretsen’s meaning-
implication distinction.
3 The sciences try to generalize as much as possible. Theories and laws are valuable because they
apply to many situations. Knowledge that only applies to one particular, say, knowledge that only
explains how one ball rolls, is extremely limited and contingent. Thus, it seems that knowledge
ought to concern universals, not particulars.
Works Cited
Aristotle. Basic Works of Aristotle. Ed. Richard McKeon. New York: Modern
Library, 2001.
Bäck, Allan. Aristotle’s Theory of Predication. Leiden: Brill, 2000.
Englebretsen, George. “Aristotle on the Subject of Predication.” Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 21 (1978): 614–16.
Gyekye, Kwame. “Aristotle and a Modern Notion of Predication.” Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 15 (1974): 615–18.
———. “Aristotle on Predication: An Analysis of Anal. Post. 83a.” Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 20 (1979): 611–15.
Novak, Joseph A. “Some Recent Work on the Assertoric Syllogistic.” Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 21 (1980): 229–42.
Hamlyn, D. W. “Aristotle on Predication.” Phronesis 6 (1961): 110–26.
Lewis, Frank. Substance and Predication in Aristotle. New York: Cambridge
UP, 1991.