Aporia, Vol. I, No. 1 (Fall 1991)
The Realization of Theory in Plato's Republic
Scott Hendricks
Plato's creation of a new literary genre has engendered many
conflicts over his intentions and the main philosophical principles
expressed in these dialogues.T he traditional system lifted from his body
of worics has provided a backdrop for much of our philosophical
tradition. But while this system is in itself a great achievement, it does
not encompass the whole of Plato's thought Assuming that it is
constructive to the philosophical enterprise to give any great work an
altemative reading if the text allows, I wiU assert that the Socratic
emphasis on virtue that characterizes Plato's early dialogues is still the
primary theme in the Republic. The text of the Republic is an example
of how virtue is instilled and does not merely treat this theme as a
theoretical issue. I will show that Socrates' development of theoretical
models central to the Republic not only relies on rational discussion but
on the character of his interlocutors, and that the idea of the realization
of theory provides the catalyst by which virtue is inculcated. First, it is
important to lay down the basic assumptions I will be making in this
treatment of Plato's Republic.
The dialogue form that Plato used provides a text that allows for
more broad and varied interpretations than the traditional philosophical
treatise. One does not need to refer to Plato's statements in the Seventh
Letter regarding his disdain for the treatise form and his refusal to record
his own ideas to see that the dialogues do not present the body ofP lato's
thought precisely and orderly as a treatise might. When the Republic is
treated as a dramatic piece, an altemative reading can emerge. Some of
the more important considerations ofs uch a reading are as follows: first,
explicit statements made by Socrates are not to be imconditionally
accepted as doctrine. Plato provides the reader with wamings as to the
credibility of certain phrases and discussions. When the reader is aware
of such wamings and incorporates their implications in an interpreta
tion, as much sense can be made of the material as in a traditional
interpretation. Second, due to the dramatic quality of the dialogue, it
cannot be expected to present the ideas it contains in a strict and orderly
fashion as a treatise would. Rather, many statements refer to both
33
preceding and later passages scattered about the dialogue. While the
immediate context of a passage may sometimes lend itself to a tradi
tional reading, these other scattered passages make possible a different
interpretation, the strength of which will supply its own credibility.
Third, the characters in the dialogue are just that—characters—and
need to be treated as such. As will be shown below,t he personality traits
of Glaucon are Just as important to the development of Plato's ideas as
Socrates' explicit discussion of the issues.
The first step in this discussion requires that we establish the role of
Glaucon and Adeimantus in the dialogue. A clear example of how
Glaucon affects the course oft he dialogue occurs in the second Book of
the Republic where, following Socrates' agreement to help the group
discover justice, they begin to construct a city. Socrates completes his
description oft he city with a passage that ends with this:" then,r eclining
upon a bed ofs trewn bryony and myrtle leaves, they will feast together
with their children, drinking of their wine. Crowned with wreaths they
will hymn the gods and enjoy each other, bearing no more than their
means aUow,c autious to avoid poverty and war"( 372b). But before the
party can attempt to discover justice in this model Glaucon interrupts
and demands that Socrates include seasonings for the food and cooked
dishes in his description. Socrates complies but is again interrupted
when Glaucon calls the city a" city of pigs" and tells him to supply more
comforts for their imagined citizens( 372d). Socrates follows with this
passage:" I understand. We should examine not only the birth of a city,
but of a luxurious city ... Yet to me the true city is that which we
described, like a healthy individual. However, if you wish, let us also
observe the feverish city"( 372e-373a). And so,f or the remainder oft he
dialogue we are only given hints oft he healthy city Socrates would have
established and are left to contend with "purifying" Glaucon's city.
Two points are made here. First, Glaucon's overbearing drive for
unnecessary appetites establish him as an unreliable source for dealing
with philosophical truths. Second,S ocrates is responding to the specific
character of Glaucon and is willing submit to the demands of his
personality traits. As they direct the course of the dialogue, these traits
inform and help shape the developing theoretical activity.
The respective positions ofS ocrates and Glaucon are established in
a later passage regarding the philosophical nature (Socrates begins and
Glaucon answers):
34
Some people have a natural aptiuide for philosophy and for leading
the state, while others have not that aptitude and must follow the
leader. —^This would be the time for that definition.
Come then,f ollow me in this, if we can somehow explain it—
Lead on.( 474c)
As we continue reading the dialogue, we can depend on Socrates to
guide the discussion in some purposeful and constructive fashion.
Socrates seems to have a broader purpose in mind,a nd is not necessarily
attempting to reach a certainty concerning ontological truths. As Plato's
idea of the realization of theory becomes clearer, Socrates' role as a
teacher of virtue will be obvious.
The notions of theory and practice are first introduced by Adeiman-
tus in Book 11. Following the brothers' presentation of the problem of
justice, Adeimantus asks Socrates to show them the nature ofj ustice,
but says," Do not merely give us a theoretical proof... but tell us how
each[ j ustice and injustice] affects a man"( 367b). Socrates agrees to
do so but only a page later proposes that they construct a theoretical city
to direct the task they have set before themselves( 369a). The difficulties
that begin to emeige here define and direct the remainder of the
discussion. How theory is related to practice,o r more clearly,h ow word
is realized into deed, is not understood by the brothers. Also, because
Glaucon and Adeimantus do not know the respective roles of word and
deed in regards to the nature of realizing theory, conflicts between the
two notions begin to dominate their arguments. On the other hand, we
can assume that Socrates,b eing a philosopher,i s aware oft his confusion
and is directing the dialogue to a purposeful end. He begins defming the
relationship between word and deed in this statement to the brothers:
That seems well deserved, my friends; you must be divinely inspired
if you are not convinced that injustice is better than justice... And I
do believe that you are really unconvinced by your own words. I base
this beliefo n my knowledge of the way you live,f or,i fI had only your
words to go by, I would not trust you.( 368b, italics added)
Here, Socrates has established that the discussion concerns virtue and
has shown the mutual dependance of word and deed.T he concern for the
realization oft heory is left undiscussed while they proceed in construct
ing Glaucon's city, but reappears in Book V,w here Socrates himselfa sks
whether the common sharing of wives and children is possible (45()d;
35
452e). As he later lets the issue slip, Glaucon attempts to hold him to the
task of proving its possibility and Socrates responds with the following:
Allow me, however, to indulge myself as if on holiday, as lazy-
minded people feast on their own thoughts whenever they take a walk
alone. Instead off inding out how something they desire may become
a reality, such people pass over that question to avoid wearying
themselves by deliberating in what is possible and what is not; they
assume that what they desire is available ... I am myself at this
moment getting soft... I will assume that it is feasible.( 458a-b)
Socrates' continued unwillingness to discuss this topic wiU eventually
lead to more drastic conclusions than his merely assuming its possibil
ity. But here,t he following is established: Socrates has not dismissed the
importance of realizing theory into practice, but he is not willing to
prove that it is possible. Later, in the same Book,G laucon, for the last
time, calls Socrates' attention back to this issue and demands that he
"remember the subject [that was] postponed before... namely,t hat it is
possible for this city to exist and how it can be brought about"( 471c).
Socrates responds with one of the most pivotal statements in the
Republic:
It was then to have a model that we were seeking the nature ofjustice
itself, and of the completely just man, if he should exist ... Our
purpose was, with these models before us, to see how they turned out
as regards happiness and its opposite ... It was not our purpose to
prove that these could exist.
Well then, do we not also say that we were making a model of a
good city in our argument? —Certainly.
Do you think our discussion less worthwhile if we cannot prove
that it is possible to found a city such as we described? —Not at all.
And indeed ... that is the truth.( 472c-e, italics added)
With the traditional interpretations so locked in our heads,i t may be
difficult, for the moment, to assume nothing about Plato's intentions.
Anyone familiar with the Theory of Forms could easily be tempted to
construe Socrates' mention of a model of the good city and justice as a
precursor to the Forms. But at this point, based on the text, the reader
has no reason to make this assumption. If we continue the above passage
exactly where it left off, our alternative interpretation begins to emei^e.
Buti f we must,t o please you,e xert ourselves to pursue this topic,t hen
36
you in turn should agree that the same thing applies to this demonstra
tion. —^What thing?
Is it possible to realize anything in practice as it can bef ormu
lated in words or is it naturalforpractice to have a lesser grip on truth
than theory ...7 —I agree.
Then do not compel me to show that the things we have described
in theory can exist precisely in practice. (473a, italics added)
Just as Glaucon misdirected the discussion regarding the establishment
ofa city that would provide a model forj ustice,h e has achieved the same
results here. Socrates, in his imwillingness to discuss the realization of
theory and in his compliance to the wishes of Glaucon, establishes
theory and words in a higher realm of reality than practice and facts. He
puts a stop to any continued discussion with Glaucon regarding the
possibility of theory. But because the careful reader remains skeptical
of all Socrates' maneuvers, one has to ask: Is he actually revealing the
true hierarchy of reality? Or, in accommodating Glaucon's
unphilosophical demands,d oes the dialogue aim at a different purpose,
namely, the inculcation of virtue? Socrates, in an earlier passage( 472
c-e), affirms that the discussion about the city is worthwhile indepen
dent ofa ny prooft hat it is possible. The following examination wiU first
show that the dialogue fails to retain the ontological priority of theory.
Also,w hile the discussion regarding the realization oft heory has ended,
Plato continues the development of this issue in showing rather than
explicitly telling the reader how theory is realized. This account of
realization will explain why theory is still worthwhile in philosophy and
serves to inculcate virtue.
Although theory has been established in their argument as having
more reality, a number of later passages fail to consistently uphold this
assumption. In the beginning of Book VI, Adeimantus interrupts
Socrates' exposition of the reasons for a rule of philosophers. He
confronts Socrates with the accusation that the questions posed by the
latter force small concessions in each answer that results in a fallacy at
the end (487b). He continues with the following:
Just as inexperienced checkers players are in the end trapped by the
experts and cannot make a move,s o they too are trapped in the end...
in this different kind ofc heckers which is played not with counters but
with words; yet they do not believe the conclusion to be in any way
more true for that... He cannot oppose you in argument, yet he sees
that inf act,o f those who turn to philosophy,[ they are] quite useless
37
to the state.( 487c-d, italics added)
Socrates tells Adeimantus thatt hose who say this" seem to speak the
truth" and he continues by explaining why he thinks that philosophers
are considered useless (487e). Socrates does not question the impor
tance of observation to the purpose oft heir discussion. Rather,h e seems
to imply by his statement," they seem to speak the truth"( italics added),
that he does not accept the assertion that philosophers are useless merely
on a hasty observation by Adeimantus. In fact, he goes on to show that
this reputation is a product of ignorance regarding the actual facts and
not of an intrinsic worthlessness of philosophers. A page later, he
recapitulates the discussion and confirms that this is the case. "You then
interposed that everyone would be compelled to agree with what we
said, but if he abandoned the argument and looked at the actual facts
which the argument was about, he would say that some philosophers
were useless while the majority had every kind ofv ice. So we examined
the reason for this slander"( 490 d). Socrates is not suggesting that
Adeimantus' recourse to factual data was a mistake, but that he had not
gotten his facts right. By reasonably discussing their observations,
Socrates reaches what is, in fact, the case; that philosophers are only
useless because the many do not understand them. In a later argument,
Socrates again recognizes that fact shares in reality and also begins to
shed some light on the nature of theory: "Until the philosophers attain
power in a city there will be not respite from evil for either city or
citizens, nor will the constitution which we have imagined in our
argument ever be realized in fact"( 501e). Because the reader of Plato
can assume from the Seventh Letter that the philosopher-king was an
idea that Plato took seriously, we are inclined to take this statement at
face value. The important element oft his passage is his reference to the
city as imagined in argument Further passages reinforce this concep
tion of the theoretical city and after an examination of the divided line,
some conclusions begin to emerge.
As they create the image of the soul, Glaucon makes the following
comment:" A work for a clever modeller... however,a s words are more
malleable that wax and such things,t ake it as fashioned"( 588d). Here,
the suggestion is that the product of such a theoretical activity is seen as
the creation of the modeller, not as the discovery of some already
existing model. Glaucon and Socrates end the Book with the following
words (Glaucon begins):
38
I understand... you mean in the city which we were founding and
described,o iu city of words,f or I do not believe it exists anywhere on
earth.
Perhaps... it is a model laid up in heaven,f or him who wishes to
look upon,a nd as he looks,s et up the government of his soul. It makes
no difference whether it exists anywhere or will exist (592b,i talics
added)
In the pai^graph above, the ontological priority is once more shifted
away from the conceptual realm. We are reminded of the beginning of
the dialogue where words had only a partial influence in revealing the
truth, and the last line of this passage reinforces Socrates' earliest
contention that theory has value independent of its possibility for
existence. The divided line continues this trend.
At the end of Book VI, in his treatment of the form of the Good,
Socrates describes the divided line to Glaucon. The line is divided into
two unequal sections, one being the visible realm and the other the
intelligible. These sections are subdivided and also given names. "You
will then," he says," have sections related to each other in proportion to
their clarity and obscurity"( 509e). If this is the case,t hen by following
Socrates' directions for dividing the line, the visible portion ends up
longer than the intelligible, and consequently, contains more clarity. It
is difficult to believe that Plato was not aware of what proportions would
result from his formula,o r that the divisions he suggested were arbitrary
and of no concem to the developing discussion. Obviously Plato
intended that these proportions reflect some ideas regarding the issue at
hand. Some lines down Socrates concludes the discussion with these
words:" Place these in the due terms ofp roportion and consider that each
has as much clarity as the content ofi ts particular section shares in truth"
(511c). Plato is again suggesting the opposite of what previously has
been asserted, that the weight of reality rests solely in theory. In the
following Book, Socrates suggests changes in the divided line. Al
though the object ofh is activity is not clearly named,h is speaking oft wo
subdivided sections divided proportionately leaves no doubt as to his
purposes. In this new division the visible realm falls away and aU the
sections are related to some kind ofc onceptual realm. The proportions
change and the bottom section becomes opinion with its lowest subdi
vision being imagination. IfS ocrates is asserting this to be the case,t hen
we can include in the section of imagination the theoretical city
39
discussed in the passages above.
While the explicit argument would imply that their theory ofj ustice
and city of words has more claim to actual existence than facts,S ocrates'
and Glaucon's discussion fails to continually uphold this notion. One
may be led to speculate that it is Glaucon and Adeimantus who fail to
perpetuate this belief, as their unphUosophical nature has prevented
them from understanding the higher reality of theory. But two points
make this doubtftil. First, Socrates is not reluctant to agree with their
statements,a nd will often amend these statements with more developed
ideas (592b; 472c-e). Second, we are reminded of Thrasymachus'
argument in the first Book. While Thrasymachus began by holding that
justice was the advantage of the stronger, he was not able to retain this
inversion of the truth later in the argiunent. Excitedly, Thrasymachus
begins purporting that injustice "brings the greatest happiness to the
wrongdoer," showing that he knew his version ofj ustice was actually
the opposite all along( 344a). The discussion oft heory likewise follows
this patten. While at first theory is given privilege, the text fails to
support this assertion.
It is clear at this point that Plato is suggesting a relationship between
word and deed different from the solution explicitly proposed by
Socrates (in 473a). Throughout the Republic, Socrates stresses the
importance of taking into account both word and deed when making
judgements( 368b;3 82a-c;3 83a). In anearlierpassage,S ocrates makes
it clear that he would believe the words of Adeimantus if he had only
these to go by and no knowledge of his life (368b). Finally, any
relationship posed between theory and fact should also explain either
how Glaucon's leading astray the dialogue does not alter the philosophi
cal truths Plato may be trying to examine; or, if it does alter the
development of a more accurate theoretical representation of reality,
why Socrates fails to correct it.
The realization of possibilities becomes a kind of imitation. A
similar imitation is attacked in the final Book oft he dialogue,b ut differs
from the former in an important respect This difference is explained in
the following passage:" I think that the poetic imitator though he knows
nothing except how to imitate, gives colour to certain crafts with words
and phrases so that others without knowledge, whoj udge by the words,
believe that anything said with meter, itiythm, and tune ... is right."
(601a). Socrates is suggesting that the poet, lacking the ability to
reasonably theorize,i ndiscriminately imitates the objects of his experi-
40
ence. Those who, in turn, imitate the poems take an unreasonable and
lawless model as their guide. Opposed to this is rational discussion.T his
kind of word-craft helps produces models based on the order and
stability of reason itself. Imitation of such models wiU presumedly
result in stable and ordered behavior. In the discussions already men
tioned, Socrates has suggested that theory acts in constructing models
(472c-e: 592b). Although models such as the three-part soul, the
divided line, and the just city are presented to Glaucon and Adeimantus
as an account of reality, they are in fact only concepts generated in their
discussion by which the two non-philosophers can learn to behave
virtuously. These concepts have an ontological status only in so far as
Glaucon and Adeimantus take them for reality and realize them through
imitative practice. Here,t he character of Glaucon is not only the object
of Socrates' efforts but a necessary tool in developing the theoretical
models that wiU serve best to inculcate virtue.
By replacing the myths of Homer with his own myths, Socrates
intends to cultivate harmony and moderation not merely in the minds of
the brothers, but in their actions. Socrates makes the necessity of
practice clear in an aside during his discussion on the virtue of intelli
gence." Now the other so-called virtues oft he soul seem to be very close
to those of the body—they really do not exist before and are added later
by habit and practice" (518e). The nature of virtue as an order and
stability is mentioned throughout the dialogue.S ocrates explicitly states
that "the philosopher, who consorts with what is divine and ordered,
himself becomes godlike and ordered as far as a man can"( SOOd). In the
discussion of the god at the end of Book II the "strongest and most
knowledgeable soul would be least disturbed and changed by any
outside experience" (381a). More evidence of this is provided in the
discussion of a virtuous man:
He is not pure in his attitude to virtue because he lacks the best of
guardians. —What is that?
Reasonable discourse ... with an admixture of the arts, for this
dwells in a man as the sole preserver of his virtue throughout his life.
(549b)
While they have not learned metaphysical truths, Glaucon and
Adeimantus have engaged in a rational discussion with Socrates, who
attempts to instill in them the preservation of a moderate and just
behavior. From the beginning,S ocrates is aware of the impossibility of
41
teaching Glaucon and Adeimantus the truth about reality. In fact, the
reader is left to doubt whether Socrates knows or is at all concerned with
transcendental knowledge. But because it is necessary for Glaucon to
believe in the models as a reality,S ocrates is willing to treat the dialogue
as a metaphysical discussion. His emphasis on theory keeps Glaucon
unconcerned with the model as serving any purpose other than truth.T he
appetitive nature of both brothers extends not only into the material
world but into the conceptual world as well. Socrates indulges their
desire for" knowledge"a nd constructs a mythological reality oft heories
to replace the myths they have previously imitated. Socrates is not
teaching the brothers the nature of reality, but how to act. As these new
myths are based both on rational inquiry and the character of the
interlocutor, they supply a better ground for just behavior. Socrates'
statement at the close of Book IX makes this clear: "it is better for
everyone to be ruled by divine intelligence. It is best that he should have
this within himself, but if he has not, then it must be imposed from
outside"(590d).
In the end, rational discussion and theoretical activity become the
device by which the ignorant many are to be taught virtue. Just as
Socrates completes the" dream"o f a model ofj ustice in Book IV,s o one
"is in reality such as we said a man was in his dreams"( 443c: 576b;
respectively).
Bibliography
Plato. Republic. Translated by G. M.A . Hackett. Indianapolis, 1974.
42