Af)oria Vol. 10 number 1,2000
What It Means To Know
REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
Words considered well defined in one context will not necessarily be
well defined in another a more knowledgeable context,a nd words that are at
best ambiguously defined to begin with can become nearly incomprehensible
when thrust into an entirely new situation of understanding. Such a
problem is especially easy to come by in philosophy of mind, where our
understanding base is changing more quickly than much of our vocabulary.
A particularly important example of this phenomenon is found in the
concept of what it is to know something. Formed at a time when our
understanding of both the mind and its context in the physical world were
radically different than they are now, this concept is, in its current form,
utterly insufficient to allow us to deal with the questions with which the
field is currently grappling. We are, however,f inally at a point where it has
become possible to work out a redefinition of this concept based on our
newer, slightly more physical knowledge of the mind/brain. This work
allows us to both unsnarl some of the confusions based on previous failed
attempts at just such a redefinition, as well as recast many of our current
dilemmas—such as those of Searle, Nagel, and McGinn—in a bit clearer
light. Finally, when all of this is done, we reach the relieving conclusion
that the state ofp hilosophy of mind is not nearly as dire as it is apt, at times,
to appear.
Agreement on what it means to know something has always been a
bit shaky. The Oxford English Dictionary prefaces its definition of the word
Rebecca Hendrickson is a senior biochemiscry and neurobiology major at the
University of Washington. After graduation she plans to pursue an M.D./Ph.D. in
psychiatry and neurobiology.
60 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
with an explanation that there exist two competing interpretations of the
word's meaning. The first suggests that this meaning splinters into two
distinct branches, or forms, of knowing; one based on the comprehension
(or understanding) of a thing and the other based on the apprehension (or
perception) of a thing. The second interpretation argues that this second
form of knowing is invalid, and that all actual knowing can be translated
into the knowing of particular facts about a thing.'
When this amalgam of a definition is applied to modern philosophy
of mind, it produces predictably confused results. Frank Jackson, in his
famous thought experiment exploring how there could be a difference
between knowing about something and experiencing it first-hand, found
himself trapped into the conclusion that such a situation could be
explained only by essential aspects of our conscious experiences being
nonphysical and therefore, epiphenomenal (392). This confusion can be
seen to have figured equally significantly in John R. Searle's famous
Chinese Room analogy.- In this case, Searle's logic appears most cleanly
'"Know, in its most general sense, has been defined by some as' To hold for
tme or real with assurance and on (what is held to be) an adequate objective
foundation'. Mr.j ames Ward,i n Encycl. Brit. XX.4 9 s.v. Psychology, assigns to the
word two main meanings:' To know may mean either to perceive or apprehend,o r
it may mean to understand or comprehend—Thus a blind man, who cannot
know about light in the first sense, may know about light in the second, if he stud
ies a treatise on optics.' Others hold that the primary and only proper object of
knowing is a fact or facts (as in our sense 10), and that all so-called knowing of
things or persons resolves itself, upon analysis,i nto the knowing ofc ertain facts about
these, as their existence, identity, nature, attributes, etc., the particular fact being
understood from the context, or by a consideration of the kind of fact which is
usually wanted to be known about the thing or person in question. Tlius,' Do you
know Mr.G.?',' Do you know Balliol Gtllege?' have different meanings according to
the kind off acts about Mr. G. or Balliol College, which are the objects ofi nquiry."
Compact Edition oft he Oxford English Dictionary, entry for' know'.
-Searle's Chinese Room thought experiment asks the reader to imagine an
individual who speaks only English,a nd who has been placed in a locked room with
several baskets of Chinese symbols and a rulebook, written in English, for the
manipulation oft hose symbols.T he rulebook makes no mention of the "meanings"
of the symbols, but explains their manipulation on the basis of syntax alone. The
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 61
explained by the interpretation that in his own attempt to explain this
same difference between the possession of all relevant information in some
form or another and the experience of knowing something that humans
are so acutely aware of, he arrived at the conviction that this special
second form of knowing something must be a unique production of the
physical components of our brains. It was this conviction that fueled his
arguments for a qualitative and irreducible difference between semantic
and syntactic knowledge.' Indeed, the conclusion that the differences in
the two forms ofk nowledge must be the result ofj ust such a syntax/semantics
duality is prevalent throughout philosophy of mind.-"
What it is important to notice, however, before one accepts these
conclusions too readily, is that the definitional conflict on which they
rely was formed at a time when we knew far less about how the mind
works than is known today. In particular, they were formulated at a time
when the predominant assumption was that the human mind is perfectly
transparent to itself. In other words, it was presumed that what "one
part" of the mind knew, "all parts" of the mind must know—to the
reader is then asked to suppose that there takes place an exchange between the
person in the room and some actual Chinese speakers outside the room, who pass
questions, written in Chinese, under the door for the person in the room to answer.
One is to suppose that the rule book provides such sophisticated instmctions for
symbol manipulation that the Chinese speakers outside the room can ask the per
son in the room anything they like, but will not be able to distinguish him from a
true Chinese speaker. The point of the thought experiment is that although the
individual in the room is capable of mimicking all the outward appearances ofo ne
who truly understands Chinese, the fact that he really only has access to a formal,
syntactic rule-based system for manipulating the symbols precludes him from ever
actually possessing a true, semantic understanding of the language. The sugges
tion that given such a setup, the individual in the room would have nothing that
could be taken for a real understanding of Chinese is assumed by Searle to be an
obvious point( Minds 32-33).
'Cf. Searle's "Minds, Brains, and Programs,"" Author's Response," and "Yin
and Yang Strike Out." Also Fodor's "Searle on What Only Brains Can Do" and
"Afterthoughts: Yin and Yang in the Chinese Room."
■•Cf., for example, Dennett's Elbou) Room:The Varieties of Free Will Worth
Wanting, 28-29.
62 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
extent, at least, that philosophy has even been able to conceive of the
mind as being composed of distinct parts. This vein of thinking is seen
most explicitly laid out by such historically fundamental thinkers as
Descartes, who comments famously regarding his conviction that there
could not be a thought in his mind that he himself did not know (29). It
can also be seen as a key assumption intertwined throughout the ideas at
which we have just now been looking. In Jackson's analysis, for example,
this completely unmentioned assumption is obviously essential to his
conclusions; if it is removed, Jackson's dilemma dissolves immediately,
guilty of the same fallacy as if he had told a tale about two women locked
in a room,o ne of whom was given all sorts of information, and the other
of whom was then released into the world to test the knowledge her
friend had been given. Searle's issues as well, at heart, depend on this
same assumption. It is only in this context that it makes any sense to
appeal to one's intuition that the man in the room does not himself
know Chinese, regardless of the abilities lodged in his brain; in particular,
it is clear that Searle, in assuming that the internalization of the rules
the man has been given is sufficient reply to the systems reply he was
often given, is certainly not counting on issues of what part of the man's
brain knows what.
The next point that must be noted is that this assumption is essentially
wrong. There is no reason to think that the mind is internally transparent,
and, as we shall see, there are a good number of reasons to think that it is
not. First, as is clear to anyone who has ever thought about the problem of
how one would go about designing an artificial intelligence (AI) program,
one of the biggest problems inherent to designing a thinking system
modeled after our own minds is how to craft an information-retrieval
system able to procure the relevant information at the proper time. Any
conception we can come up with for how the brain processes information
faces similar problems: information stored in one form, in order to have
bearing on later decisions and processing, must be appropriately retrieved;
if it is not, the fact that one part of the brain has the information does not
mean that the part of the brain processing newer information will be able
to bring that older information to bear now. Although this does not
demonstrate with certainty that the brain has not found a way around this
difficulty, it does suggest that it is foolhardy to assume that it must have.
What about when we examine our own behavior? Do we behave
like creatures whose minds operate with total internal transparency?
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 63
Clearly, on the level of informational recall, the answer is a resounding
"no." We have all had experience with trying to remember that bit of
crucial information that is "just beyond the edge" of what we can mange
to bring to conscious attention right then, but which we remember clearly a
few minutes later. The information was there, in our minds,a ll along, but
somehow just not in the right place/form right when they needed it. To
look at why and how such a phenomenon might occur, as well as what it
might mean for our conscious minds more directly, it is useful to be able
to explore the topic in the context of a more specific model of
mind/brain function. One model that is particularly well suited to just
such an exploration is the Multiple Drafts Model of consciousness, put
forth by philosopher Daniel Dennett in his book Consciousness
Explained as a synthesis of the work of a multitude of other researchers
and philosophers.'
Before we delve into the details of how this model explains our
observations, however, it is worthwhile to note that even as he was
forming this model, Dennett made the concept of consciousness as
essentially intertwined with the resolution of imperfect internal transparency
of mind a cornerstone of the logic motivating the theory's development.
In a book based on a series of lectures given nearly a decade before
Consciousness Explained was released, Dennett attempts to motivate his
suggestion that consciousness is best viewed as an internal communication
system modeled in a very real way after the concept of" talking to oneself."
He comments:
Under what conditions would the activity of asking oneself questions
be useful? All one needs to suppose is that there is some compartmen-
talization and imperfect internal communication between compo
nents of a creature's cognitive system, so that one component can
need the output of another component but be unable to address that
component directly.( Elbow Room 40-41)
4t is important to notice that one need not even subscribe to Dennett's
model in order to acknowledge that the fact that such a model can have these
results demonstrates that the exits indicated from the relevant dilemmas must
therefore exist.
64 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
This concept was then expanded in his later work, where he writes
that:
All that has to he the case for this practice to have this utility is for the
preexisting access-relations within the brain of an individual to be
less than optimal. Suppose, in other words, that although the right
information for some purpose is already in the brain, it is in the hands
of the wrong specialist; the subsystem in the brain that needs the
information cannot obtain it directly from the specialist—because
evolution has simply not got around to providing such a "wire."
(Consciousness Explained 195-96)
Already we know what answer this model provides to our question of
whether or not our minds have been blessed with internal transparency.
Before we can utilize this information in the reformulation of our concept
of "to know," however, we need to understand a bit more clearly the
mechanisms by which the model suggests this issue is dealt with by our
minds. Dennett's theory on this subject relies heavily on what he calls the
"Pandemonium Model" of thought. In this model, much of our brain is
structured into a host of subroutines that function as quasi-independent
demons, whose job it is to each run around comparing the information
they have regarding the situation at hand to the stored information and
plans laid out in the brain, and produce together an array ofp attern-matched
options for ideas and actions that then compete with each other to select
out the most accurate and productive. Writes Dennett,
And in place of the precise, systematic "fetch-execute cycle" or
"instruction cycle" that brings each new instruction to the instruction
register to be executed, we should look for imperfectly marshaled,
somewhat wandering, far-from-logical transition "mles," where the
brain's largely innate penchant for "free association" is provided with
longish association-chains to more or less ensure that the right
sequences get tried out.( Consciousness Explained 225)
In other words, we cannot expect our brains to have ideal information-
retrieval systems. Instead, depending on the way a particular bit of
information has been stored, it will be recognized differently, and at different
times,b y the information-retrieval demons that drive our thinking processes.
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 65
At last we have developed the grounds on which we can formulate
our new understanding of what it means to know something, and begin to
answer the question of why there has been so much confusion about
whether or not there exist two different forms of knowledge. The mistake
that has until now been so commonly made is to assume that the observation
of what appear to be two distinct kinds of knowing—conceptual and
perceptual—must necessarily imply that there must be two kinds of
knowledge. This is the origin ofJ ackson's physical vs." qualia" knowledge,
and of Searle's semantic vs. syntactic knowledge. The only option left for
one who wishes to maintain that there exists only one kind ofk nowledge is
to deny even that there exist two kinds of knowing. This is the trap that
our realization that the mind is not perfectly transparent has sprung for us,
however. For now, we are able to see that an alternate explanation for the
two kinds of knowing we observe in our lives is that the same kind of
knowledge can just be stored in different ways. As we saw above, the
treatment this knowledge receives in our brain is imperfectly linked to its
content and is instead significantly form-dependent. Thus,t he different
experience and different subsequent associations made as a result of
having experienced something, versus knowing the same relevant facts but
in a different way, is then explained by the differential processing treatment
that results from the two ways knowledge is received and stored.
To make our new definition more concrete, we can observe that even
while acknowledging the point oft he second interpretation—that there is at
heart only one kind ofk nowledge that one can possess—we can nevertheless
explain the dichotomy pointed to by the first interpretation by considering
the first (conceptual) form of knowing to be a general reference to the
possession, usually but not always in an linearly logical format,o fk nowledge
about a thing, while viewing the second (perceptual) form of knowing as
referring only to the more particular situation of possessing knowledge that
is in the format provided by one's sensory input subroutines. One can
conceptualize the kind of difference we are talking about by thinking of
the difference between knowing (1) that A=B, B=C, and C=D, and
knowing (2)t hat A=B=C=D. Now,a s long as the question asked is of the
form "Does A=D?", and we've got a couple of logic circuits built in to
remind us that if two things are both equal to a third thing then they are
equal to each other, then both forms of knowledge will be sufficient. But
if a case should come up with a busy subroutine-demon whose job it is
simply to run around looking for examples of A=?=?=D, there is a good
66 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
chance the first form of knowing won't produce the same result the second
form will. It is from this kind of differential result for subsequent information
processing's references to earlier experiences versus bits of abstract
knowledge that our dichotomous definitions of knowing have arisen.
Now, what does the resolution of this difficulty mean for philosophy
of mind? We have already seen how the introduction of the concept of
imperfect internal transparency dissolves the dilemma Jackson presents us
in his paper; with the work laid out above, we have even seen how his two
presumed kinds of knowledge actually arise out of the different storage
forms of that knowledge. How about our other dilemma discussed above,
authored by Searle? Before the confusion of this piece may be completely
resolved, however, there is still one final definitional issue to clear up.
Although, as was discussed above, it is reasonable to ascribe much of the
infamous syntax/semantics distinction's gut-level motivation to an
attempt to resolve the internal conflict inherent in our traditional
working-definition of "to know," the grounds on which this argument
have been logically justified are not the same as the grounds on which it
has been intuitively sold, and must hence be dealt with independently.
Traditionally, the argument used to explain the syntax/semantics
distinction for meaning is conceived ofa s running parallel to the distinction
as it is defined in the context ofg rammar.T his argument suggests that there
are two kinds,o r forms,o f meaning contained in a sentence—that contained
in the sentence's structure, or syntax, and that contained in the sentence's
content,o r semantics. The parallel in philosophy of mind suggests that so
far, we can make AI that is able to manipulate quite adeptly syntax-type
knowledge, but that we will never be able to get past this, because all that
a mechanical system is capable of doing is manipulating symbols that
are only defined relative to certain patterns of input/output. As these
patterns of input/output can never be independently defined or given
meaning it is concluded that an artificially created machine can never
possess semantic-type knowledge (Dennett, Elbow Room 28-29).
The fallacy of logic here is perhaps a difficult one to see, at first,
because we have all been so well trained not to believe it. But the key real
ization is not that semantic knowledge actually can be created out of syn
tactic knowledge but that true semantic knowledge just does not exist in
the first place. This, really, is the issue the second interpretation of the
word "to know" was striving to clarify—that, in the end, all knowledge
comes down to simple facts that can be categorized on some level as
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 67
statements relating two sets of syntactical categories. Why this statement
is true can perhaps best be understood through the internal experiment of
sitting down and honestly challenging oneselft o come up with any concept,
fact, or object that one believes one knows that can, in the end, be defined
in any absolute sense (i.e., defined in any sense other than through its
relationships with other facts and bits of knowledge and fragments of
sensory data). Although we usually talk like when we see a thing, we see
in some way its essence, we must keep in mind that the only information
we receive when we perceive an object is the raw data from our sensory
input; any further information we leam about this object can only be related
to this collection of sensory data we take to represent the object which is
now familiar. There is no more essential way of learning about something
than this repeated linking ofs ensory data with previous sets ofs ensory data
and forming patterns out of it that we then consider information. And yet,
we don't usually feel like we are missing the gist of whatever objects we
interact with from day to day. Clearly, our general conception of what it is
for us to know something is able to survive quite well on syntax-based
information alone.
Although this logic alone is not enough to topple our faith in the
syntax/semantics dichotomy, when combined with the work we have
already done to remove our original intuition that such a thing should
even exist, we are left with no real reason to expect that this mythological
semantic knowledge,t he way it is currently defined,s hould exist anywhere
in our universe. Finally, we are in a position to fully understand Searle's
Chinese Room argument,a nd where it goes wrong. First, as we saw above,
any physicalist who buys into the syntax/semantics dichotomy is faced
with a serious difficulty in that at least on first glance, the conclusion that
no machine can create semantic knowledge rules out the machine we call
the human brain, as well. This difficulty is particularly troubling for Searle,
who is most definitely a physicalist,( Minds 18) yet whose conviction that
it must be this very syntax/semantics distinction that holds the key to
explaining the difference in the two forms of meaning presented above,
makes him unwilling to give up the idea that the human mind is capable
of generating semantic knowledge. It is because of this difficulty that
Searle comes to the conclusion that there must be something inherent in
the actual, chemical makeup of our brains that allows them to escape this
trap. As we have already removed, however, both the need to rely on the
syntax/semantics dichotomy to explain the confusion over the meaning
68 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
of "knowing," as well as any independent reason for expecting such a
dichotomy to exist, we may safely avoid Searle's conclusions.
There still remains, however, one final aspect of Searle's argument
that we are ignoring, but which our newfound definitions also have the
power to help us confront. This is the aspect of what it means to be conscious.
Although it does make sense to interpret Searle's work as an attempt to
resolve the two-forms-of-knowing disjunction with appeals to the
syntax/semantics dichotomy, it is hard to deny that the final driving force
behind our willingness to even consider Searle's outlandish conclusion
that there must just be some semi-miraculous event produced by the physical
neurons themselves that creates our sensations of experience in the end
comes down to our trailing confusion regarding where such a thing as
consciousness could possibly originate. Indeed, beyond Searle's writings,
philosophy of mind abounds with pessimistic proofs oft he impossibility of
our ever being able to understand consciousness. As a final test of the logic
that has been presented in this paper, it makes sense to look quickly at
what these concepts hold regarding the difficulties we have explaining
consciousness itself.
Two of the most well-known papers in this genre are Thomas Nagel's
"What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" and Colin McGinn's "Can We Solve the
Mind-Body Problem?" Together, they boil down to two basic critiques
against the possibility ofa scientific theory ofc onsciousness. The first, which
is addressed primarily in Nagel's paper, relies on the suggestion that because
the experiential aspect ofk nowledge is uniquely and essentially subjective, it
cannot ever be captured by an obje ctive science.'T he second critique, which
is the primary focus of McGinn's paper,s uggests that because consciousness is
an inherently experiential quantity, but our modes of thinking operate in
inherently spatial terms, that human understanding must therefore be
cognitively closed with respect to consciousness itself( 357-58).
We may make an enormous introductory simplification, however, by
first splitting Nagel's argument into two halves. The first half, which deals
'Writes Nagel," Experience itself, however, does not seem to fit the pattern.
The idea of moving from appearance to reality seems to make no sense here. What
is the analogue in this case to pursuing a more objective understanding of the same
phenomena by abandoning the initial subjective viewpoint toward them in favor
of another that is more objective but concerns the same thing?"( 425).
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 69
with the impossibility of understanding the thought patterns of other
conscious creatures, can then be dealt with off the top, while we leave the
second half, which deals with the impossibility of obtaining an objective
view of the building blocks of consciousness themselves, to be dealt with
along side the related critique on McGinn's part. The first half of Nagel's
argument has been dealt with fairly thoroughly by both Dennett and
Rosenthal. Rosenthal's response is summarized nicely by his explanation
that "since not all knowledge about mind is derived from introspection,
we have no more reason to suppose that mental states have no non-
introspectible nature than that the nature of physical objects is wholly
perceptible"( 475). It is an enactment of this claim that there may very well
be a method for the objective exploration ofo ur mental lives that is provided
by Dennett, with his method of" heterophenomenology."
The second half of Nagel's arguments, however, although also
enjoying a similar dual-response from Rosenthal and Dennett, has not
been quite so cleanly dealt with. On this front, Rosenthal begins his
attack by pointing out that
To understand how consciousness can occur in physical things, we
must dissolve the intuitive force of that gulf. And we can do so only
by explaining the consciousness of mental states in terms of men
tal states that are not conscious. For the stark discontinuity
between conscious mental states and physical reality does not also
arise when we consider only nonconscious mental states.( 474)
Dennett then jumps in, meeting this challenge as he did the first
one, by proposing an actual theory to do what Rosenthal has suggested is
possible; arguably, his Multiple Drafts Theory of consciousness succeeds
reasonably well in laying out a very rough version of just this very thing.
But this all succeeds,a s Rosenthal acknowledges,o nly in reducing the "stark
discontinuity between conscious mental states and physical reality" to the
question of how the very basic property that I will call awareness'c ould arise
from what we now know of the physical world. It is this basic property that
McGinn's argument is designed to suggest we can never hope to understand.
'To distinguish it from the image of a "conscious mental state" that is
generally conjured up in this context by the word consciousness itself.
70 REBECCA C. HENDRiCKSON
Let us look closely at the foundation of McGinn's argument.
Writes McGinn:
My argument will proceed as follows. I shall first argue that P is
indeed perceptually closed; then I shall complete the argument to full
cognitive closure by insisting that no form of inference from what is
perceived can lead us to P— But why is this? Basically, I think, it is
because the senses are geared to representing a spatial world We
get[ theories] by a sort ofa nalogical extension of what we observe
For example, we arrive at the concept of a molecule by taking our
perceptual representations of macroscopic objects and conceiving
of smaller scale objects of the same general kind. This method seems
to work well enough for unobservable material objects, but it will not
help in arriving at P, since analogical extensions of the entities we
observe in the brain are precisely as hopeless as the original entities
were as solutions to the mind-body problem. We would need a method
that left the base of observational properties behind in a much more
radical way.( 357-59)
Equipped with our recent work, however, we are in a position to
recognize McGinn's mistake: McGinn has fallen prey to the assumption
that even if he hasn't taken the time to identify exactly what it is or where
it lies, there must somewhere exist such a thing as semantic knowledge—
and it is this that his proof is designed to demonstrate can never be found
for the subject of consciousness. This mistaken assumption is seen most
clearly on McGinn's part in his comment that the method of spatial
analogies "seems to work well enough for unobservable material objects."
Yet, as any student struggling with a reasonably rigorous course in quantum
mechanics can tell us, the modern scientific theory of material objects is
arguably the least intuitive theory ever produced by mankind;i ndeed,i ft he
last hundred years of physical scientific inquiry has taught us anything, it is
that our hard-wired assumptions about the nature of matter, space, and
time are at best exceedingly rough approximations of at most a small
fraction oft hese concepts'a ctual properties. Thus, McGinn may be correct
in pointing out that the best we can hope for in an understanding of
consciousness is a roughly formed, spatially conceived, analogistic model
of the phenomena, but his mistake lies in thinking that our knowledge of
anything else is any different.
WHAT IT MEANS TO KNOW 71
In a way we have conceded defeat on several fronts. We have
acknowledged that there are very real and, on an immediate personal
level, insurmountable differences between firsthand experience and the
possession of the same relevant facts in a different form. We have come to
the conclusion that true semantic knowledge, a thing we thought we
already possessed, doesn't even exist. And we have acknowledge that
McGinn was actually, in a way,c onect in his proof that we can never fiilly
understand consciousness—in fact, perhaps we have made the situation
worse, by suggesting that not only can we never understand consciousness,
but that actually, we can never fully understand anything! At the same
time, however, we have made significant progress in return for our losses.
We have resolved, finally, both our confusion over what it means to know
something, as well as our confusion as to how a semantic engine could
have been constructed out of a syntactic one. We have avoided Jackson's
intellectual trap leading us into the dark land of epiphenomenalism. And,
finally, we have seen that although we may never be able to understand
consciousness on the complete, intuitive level we might like to, that this
doesn't mean that we have to give up. Simply because physics has learned
that the physical world cannot be explained cleanly by intuitive, spatially
based analogies does not mean that they are no longer able to make
progress. Similarly, just because we have discovered the same thing about
consciousness does not mean that we will not be able to make significant
progress. It just means there is a lot of work left to be done.
72 REBECCA C. HENDRICKSON
Works Cited
Descartes, Rene." Selections from Meditations on First Philosophy." The
Nature of Mind. Ed. David M. Rosenthal. New York: Oxford UP,
1991.29.
Dennett, Daniel. Consciousness Explained. New York: Little Brown and
Co., 1991
. Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. Cambridge,
MA:M IT Press, 1984.
Fodor, J. A. "After-thoughts: Yin and Yang in the Chinese Room." The
Nature of Mind. Ed. David M. Rosenthal. New York: Oxford UP,
1991.524-25.
."Searle on What Only Brains Can Do." The Nature of Mind. Ed.
David M.R osenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.520-21.
Jackson,F rank." What Mary Didn't Know."T he Nature of Mind. Ed. David
M.R osenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.392-94.
"Know." The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. 1971.
McGinn,C olin." Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" Mind. 98.391
(1989):3 49-66.
Nagel, Thomas." What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" The Nature ofMirtd. Ed.
David M.R osenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.422-28.
Rosenthal, David." Two Concepts ofC onsciousness." The Nature of Mind.
Ed. David M.R osenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.462-77.
Searle,J ohn R." From 'Author's Response.'" The Nature of Mind. Ed. David
M.R osenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991. 521-23.
. "Minds, Brains, and Programs." The Nature of Mind. Ed. David M.
Rosenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.509-19.
. Minds, Brains, and Science. Cambridge, MA:H arvard UP, 1984.
. "Yin and Yang Strike Out." The Nature of Mind. Ed. David M.
Rosenthal. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.525-26.