Aporia, Vol. HI, 1993
PLATO'S THEORIES OF FORMS IN THE
PHAEDO AND THE REPUBLIC
Scott Hendricks
In the middle dialogues, Plato gives a somewhat scattered account
of what has been caUed his theory of forms. The theory itself has generated
problems not only for the readers of the dialogues but for Plato as well.
The Parmenides provides an explicit example of the difficulties produced,
but there are other conflicting claims that should be the cause of some
discomfort for a careful reader. In order to recondle these difficulties, most
scholars and philosophers have offered possible interpretations of what
Plato meant by his claims. Unfortunately, as I shall point out in greater
detail, these interpretations fall short as they fail to incorporate all of the
assertions made in the dialogues. In this paper, I propose that a very
unspectacular interpretation of the theory of forms is the one which we
must assume Plato is using. This paper will focus primarily on the
relationship of the forms with the sensible world, and will show that Plato
understands this relationship in two very distinct ways. These ways
correspond to two traditional interpretations of the forms. They are; 1) The
forms are universals; and 2) the forms are standards.( I wiU refer to these
theories as UF and SF, respectively.) I will proceed by giving evidence for
the respective theories. I will further show that these theories are
incommensurable and that interpretations that fail to account for the
presence of these theories fail to account for everything that Plato asserts
of die forms. Finally, I will give an account of why I think Plato conflates
UF and SF.
During his discussions of the forms in the Phaedo and the Republic,
Plato gives the reader reasonable evidence that he understands the forms
as universals and the relationship between the forms and the sensible
world as predication. Aristotle interprets the theory of forms accordingly
in the Metaphysics:
Socrates, however,w as busying himself about ethical matters
and neglecting the world of nature as a whole but seeking
the universal in these ethical matters .... Plato accepted his
teaching but .. . sensible things, he said, were named after
these [Ideas], and in virtue of a relation to these; for the
many existed by participation in the Ideas that have the same
name as they.( 987b 1-10. Ross translation)
Aristotle's testimony will not suffice to show conclusively that Plato
understood the forms as xmiversals, and we are better off using Aristotle
2 S cott Hendricks
to provide additional support for a view already established textually. Both
the Phaedo and the Republic provide evidence for this theory. The passages,
which I wiU cite, do not give support exclusively for IIF; they may be dted
in support of SF also, since there is often some cross-over between the two
theories (and hence, this fact is a likely possiblity for the source of Plato's
conflation of the two). Nevertheless, much of what Plato teUs us about the
forms we can easily identify as what we would include in a clear
characterization of universals and predication.
In the Phaedo, Plato regards the form as a criterion for recognizing
some property in the sensible world (75 B). He says that this form is
unchangeable (79 D)a nd that the knowledge of the form is a different sort
of knowledge ^an knowing the sensible thing (73 C). Alone, the meaning
of this last claim is not immediately clear. But given other claims that Plato
provides, we can make serise of it in favor of UP. Whereas in the Phaedo,
Plato does not appear to be using the word 'knowledge' (episteme) in a
scientific way,i n the Republic Book V 476 D - 480 A,P lato teUs us that only
knowing (gignoskontos) the forms is knowledge( gndmen)i n the strict sense.
So, "knowing" the sensible world is not merely a different sort of
knowledge but not true knowledge at all. I propose that it is best seen as
a kind of sensible acquaintance; in other words, an apprehending of the
physical world by means of the senses.' This way, we can also make sense
of Plato's claim in the Republic that the forms are not seen but thought( 507
B). In other words, a particular is known by being sensed, while a form is
known through the intellect. This would support the view that the forms
are some kind of universals, since universals seem to be a different class
of entities than their sensible instantiations, and one way of differentiating
them is that they are not sensed but thought.
Finally, Plato regards the forms as distinct from the sensible world.
Using this fact to demonstrate UF may appear quite novel to the reader
since the separation of the forms is often used as an argument against UF.
I will address this later; but here, Plato seems to be arguing that the forms
are distinct and I take this as supporting the claim that universals are a
distinct class of entities. Whether or not they are ontologicaUy distinct, as
Plato seems to take them, is a different question. The argument is in the
Phaedo at 74 B-C.^ The sensible particulars appear sometimes as having
some property (F) and sometimes as not. The corresponding form of that
^Plato's use of different words in his discussion of these notions should not lead us
to believe that he was using either in a strictly technical ser\se. Any idea about what he
intends by the terms should come more from the context than from the terminology itself.
Hence, although I am arguing that there is a difference in meaning, his use of episteme on
the one hand and gndmin on the other does not establish this.
^See Appendix A for an outline of the argument.
Plato's Theories of Forms 3
property is never the opposite of that property. In other words, F-ness is
always F and never -F. By assuming a standard condition for identity, he
deduces that the form of the property is not the same as the sensible
particulars. This does not, of course, prove that the universals are distinct
from the instances of the property,b ut it does prove that they are different
from the sensible world.
Next, we move to the Republic for more evidence of UF. As already
mentioned above, the forms are thought (noeisthai) and not seen {horasthai)
(507 B). Furthermore, they are eternal and imchanging (484 B; 500 C;5 27
B). But the strongest case for UF comes at 476 A where Socrates says that
"concerning justice and injustice, good and bad, and concerning all of the
forms there is the same account, each is itself one, and thus everjrwhere,
through an association with actior\s and with bodies and with ead\ other,
each appears as many visible things."® This is an apt description of
universals and predication. Socrates also says in Book X that "we are
accustomed to assume a single form, each for every group of things to
which we confer the same name" (596 A). The preceding gives us good
reason to take Aristotle at his word, and to suppose that Plato, at least at
some point, did understand the forms as universals and participation as
predication in the middle dialogues.
The view that Plato conceived of the forms as standards is generally
thought to be the competing interpretation. In the following paragraphs,
1 will examine the textual evidence for this view. Afterwards, 1 will begin
my assessment of what 1 take to be Plato's theory of the forms. Begirming
with the Phaedo,P lato gives some very explicit reasons for taking the forms
to be vmambiguous standards which the particulars only approximate. The
standard would be, just as a imiversal, a criterion by which a sensible
particular is recognized (75c). Further,S ocrates says:" This which 1 now see
aims to be some other sort of reality [the form], but it is lacking and is not
able to be that sort of thing, but is more paltry" (74d-e). Later in the same
passage, he states that the sensible thing resembles the form and does so
inadequately (74e). Finally, Plato claims that the form is self-predicable
(75c). Without saying too much about what Plato means by this last
assertion, we can at least suppose that in order for a form of red to be red,
it must be some kind of standard and not a universal, a concept or a set.
In the Republic, Plato does not add significantly to this list. He asserts that
a form is a model (paradeigma) which is imitated or approximated (472b-c;
484c-d; 500c-e). He also repeats the point that the sensible particular
resembles the form (476c). This kind of language does not suggest a theory
such as UF. It is much less difficult to make a case for SF given that Plato
so explicitly outlines such a theory himself. We need not explicate any
further for solid evidence that Plato imderstands the forms as a standard
All trsmslations are mine, from the Oxford Classical Texts.
4 S cott Hendricks
from which the sensible particulars fall short.
Assuming now that the preceding explication is fairly representative
of the account of the forms that Plato gives in the middle di^ogues (and
I think it is), we must suppose one of two things. Either Plato is conflating
two incommensurable theories of the forms, or the distinction is a false
one, and UP and SF can be combined into a single theory. I argue that the
former possibility is the one we must take to be the case. We need only
show that UF and SF are incommensurable theories, and we can do this in
two ways. First, there are statements that can be ascribed to SF which
cannot be ascribed to UF, and vice versa. Plato claims in a number of
places that tiae forms are self-predicable. A great deal of material has been
generated over exactly what Plato meant when he made this claim, so I
will try to assume the most general accoxmt of its content. For now, self-
predication will only apply to those entities which we can substitute for 'F-
ness' in the phrase 'F-ness is F' and have the phrase make sense. Given
this, we cannot say that the universal 'redness' is itself red, while a
standard, paradigm, pattern, type, or "standard meter" (in Geach's sense)
can all be intelligibly substituted in the phrase 'F-ness is F.' There are
certain things we can predicate of universals such as intelligible, abstract
or simple, but very few of the predicates discussed by Plato fall into this
category (white, beautiful, equal, tall, shuttle, brave, etc.).
■There is another, weaker difference between UF and SF where Plato
says of the forms that "each is itself one, and thus everywhere, through an
association with actions and with bodies and with each other, each appears
as many visible things" (476a). It is much easier to construe this passage as
giving an accoimt of universals and predication than of standards and
imperfect particulars. This is primarily so for the following reasoru If we
are going to discuss the relationship between standards and particulars, it
would seem to us, as it clearly did to Plato, that 'imitation' is a more
accurate way of characterizing the relationship. The exact relationship
between a universal and its particular is much more difficult to
characterize. But even the most general description would have to account
for 1) the immanence of qualities in the sensible world and 2) an atomic
intelligible thing which we consider the property apart from its instances
(the universal). Regardless of whether universals are actually real entities
or artifacts of our language, Plato still holds closely to a loose description
of universals in the quotation above. In any case, Plato apparently
recognized that there are words in the language that do not correspond to
any single particular in the sensible world but are used to identify these
particulars. It seems reasonable that the word correspond to some entity
and, as it happens, Plato thought that it did, namely, to the form. But we
must point out that it is not impossible to develop an SF theory that also
accoimts for the passage quoted above. The difficulty is that Plato does
not explicitly make sense of this claim with regard to the forms as
Plato's Theories of Forms 5
standards. If the form is a standard, the particular imitates the form, and
Plato does not describe it accordingly here. Proponents of SF can only
account for such a view by overemphasizing and elaborating Socrates's
examples in the dialogues which we can also take as an attempt to
elucidate the notion of predication. As interesting as such a supplementary
account may be,i t seems to suppose that there is more in the text than we
may want to assume initially.
The second way of demonstrating incommensurability is related to
the directly preceding discussion. The relationship between ^e forms and
the serxsible world differs dramatically in each theory. In UF the sensible
world participates in the forms through predication. In this case we have
the 'one over many' idea and can make sense of the assertion Plato makes
that the one form exhibits itself as a multiplicity in the sensible world. On
the other hand, in the SF account the sensible particular imitates and/or
approximates the form. In the latter account we can analogize in the same
way Plato does, by giving the example of how a painting or a sculpture
would approximate or imitate its subject {Phaedo 73e; Rep. 595a-603b). The
separation between the sensible particular and the standard in SF is
proximally distinct. The imperfect particular is physically separate from the
standard. But in the case of universals, the distinction differs. While this
distinction is ontological for Plato, we can consider it merely as a logical
or linguistic one. While we experience a great many individual F tl^gs
in the sensible world, we recognize that there is one word 'F,' or some
entity 'F-ness,' which is not itself a sensible thing. Whetiier it is a word or
a re^ universal, it is distinct from the sensible thing in a way that a
standard or ideal does not achieve. Given this, in the Republic, we can see
that a general description of what predication may be is, as Plato describes,
participation, namely, as a single (transcendental) thing which, when
instantiated in the sensible world, appears in many circumstances in
different ways (476 A). In any case, Plato provides explicit statements
supporting both these views of the distinction between sensibles and
forms, yet they do not outline the same theory. Again, we have evidence
here both that Plato was using two versions of the theory of forms and that
these theories are incommensurable.
Still, a number of recent interpretations of the theory of forms have
made attempts to dismiss either UF or SF, and account for Plato's claims
in some original fashion. If Plato is, as I have argued,c onflating UF and SF
in his theory, then any interpretation or argument that dismisses one
theory in favor of the other will give an insufficient portrayal of Plato's
thought in the middle dialogues. I intend to show that this is the case. R.
S. Bluck and Alexander Nehamas seem to represent most clearly the
respective sides. Bluck argues against Ross who writes that Plato supposed
the forms to be universals. Bluck's arguments do not succeed. Nehamas
gives arguments against what he calls "the approximation view," which is
6 S coti Hendricks
essentially SF, and then he goes on to provide an interpretation of the
participation of the sensible world which we can minimally represent as
UF. These first arguments are effective against SF, but do not show that
Plato actually did not hold SF. One can criticize his interpretation on the
same grotmds. I will begin with Bluck's arguments.
Bluck has two primary arguments against those who take the forms
to be universals. First, he argues that universals are not distinct from the
sensible world (Plato's Phaedo 174-177). Because they are not distinct, Plato
could not possibly have thought of the pure, eternal, unchangeable, and
separate realities as universals. There are a number of difficulties in this
criticism. One,w hile it may be that universals are not ontologically distinct
from the sensible world, they are certainly logically distinct. Nevertheless,
given that figures in recent philosophy, such as Bertrand Russell have still
argued that universals have some further ontological status, it does not
seem clear that Plato should have so readily avoided separating them.
Further, there does not appear to be any evidence that Plato conceived of
anything like universals as being exclusively immanent except in the early
dialogues.^ Second, if this criticism were, in fact, compelling against UF,
then it would, in some sense, be more compeUmg against SF. If the form
is a standard, which is the view defended by Bluck, then it lends itself to
being distinct from sensible things only insofar as it can be regarded as a
sensible thing itself. There is no more reason to suppose that it is separate
from the sensible world than there is to say that a universal is. In fact,
insofar as a uruversal is inherently an intelligible thing, we may be able to
make quite the opposite case. Any metaphysic which assumes that the
distinction between the mind and ^e sensible world is an ontological one
should be more skeptical of mental abstractions that derive from sensible
properties (SF) than those that are invisible to the senses (UF). It could be
objected, rightly, that Plato did not understand the standards as having
derived their properties from the sensible world. Instead, he saw it the
other way around. Nevertheless, there is no compelling reason to suppose
that Plato thought that separating universals would be more problematic
than separating standards.
Bluck's second criticism is that we cannot make good sense of Plato's
claim that the sensibles "fall short" of the forms if tirey are universals (174-
181). If we regard the sensible property in isolation, it cannot be anything
short of a perfect instantiation of the universal. Bluck is simply showing
that a good account of universals and predication conflicts with Plato's
claims. On the other hand, some scholars, such as J. Malcolm, have no
difficulty asserting that an instantiation of a universal can fall short of the
universal itself( 59). There is, apparently, a missing link here which I think
Nehamas fills in. While it is true that any property is, in itself, a perfect
^R oss 225-233.
Plato's Theories of Forms 7
example of the universal, Nehamas points out that every property will be
instantiated imperfectly, and will consequently appear as falling short of
the ideal (Tlato on the Imperfection" 108-109 and 116). Further, we could
propose (with Malcolm) that the 'ideal' not be understood as the form but
as a perfect instantiation of the form, which is a universal in this case. The
difficulty here is that Plato never seems to defend a view such as the one
Nehamas provides and we are left to grapple with a legitimate criticism
from Bluck. But given the preceding, we are not compelled to give up UF
entirely. Bluck's claim that UF cannot make sense of participation as
"falling short" does not necessarily entail that Plato did not in some way
regard the forms as universals. Instead, there is now a concrete example
of the problems that arise from the conflation of UF and SF.
On the other hand, Nehamas provides some arguments against SF,
which he believes show that Plato did not subscribe to the general
description of SF. The main difficulty which he points out is an epistemic
one,n amely: if the sensible attribute only imperfectly exemplifies ^e form,
then there is no reason to take the sensible as falling short of form X rather
than of some other form Y (109-110). Again,i f the circularity in a sensible
instance of a circle only approximates the form, then we would never
know whether d\e instance of the figure was desiring the form of
circularity or the form of squareness.( For future reference, 1 will call this
the Indeterminacy of Approximate Particulars Objection or lA.) If this
criticism holds, then a standard cannot serve as a criterion for judging a
sensible thing. Nehamas ascribes much of this confusion to supposing that
when Plato says that the sensible fails short of the form, Plato means the
sensible to be taken as the attribute belonging to the object. Instead,
Nehamas explains, Plato is asserting that it is the object itself which
exhibits the attribute imperfectly. The attribute, in so far as it belongs to a
sensible thing, is a character of the form and is, in itself, perfect
("Predication and Forms" 475;' Tlato on the Imperfection" 108-109).
If we restrict ourselves to the Phaedo, Nehamas's interpretation at
first glance appears to be compelling. But as one examines the assertions
regarding the forms made in the Republic, this interpretation loses much of
its credibility. Nehamas's reading is attractive because it appeals to our
philosophicd instinct to get to the truth of the matter. That Plato could
have regarded sensible objects as bad imitations of perfect transcendental
patterns is somewhat disappointing. It is especially so in light of his
introduction of a philosophically inspiring treatment of universals. Kidding
Plato of SF solves LA and allows us to interpret Plato's treatment of the
imperfection of the sensible world in a sound way. But Plato's talk of
"imitation" in the Republic does not support Nehamas's interpretation. The
examples given by Socrates such as the craftsman's table and the artist's
rendition explain imitation in such a way that is not friendly towards
8 S cott Hendricks
Nehamas' accoiint.® Plato's account of mutation and Nehamas's account of
predication are incompatible in exactly the same way UP and SF are.^ So
instead of accepting Nehamas's interpretation, one is forced back into
supposing that Plato did, in fact, intend SF, if we are to take him at his
word. So much for a position that is unsympathetic to SF.
In the final portion of this paper I will give some reasons for why
Plato may have conflated UF and SF. In order to prove that Plato conflated
the two ^eories one must show that the forms function both as standards
and as universals, that the respective functions are incommensurable and
that an interpretation of the forms which does not account for this
conflation is inadequate. I have already addressed the preceding and
intend to support it further by speculating on Plato's motivation for
conflating the two theories. It appears that there is more than one
contributing factor towards this mistake. In the first place, Plato seems to
have improperly interpreted the imperfection of the sensible world. He
clearly recognized this imperfection and viewed it as a problem. Plato saw
that the many properties in the sensible world which fall under a single
name exhibit degrees of difference. In the attempt to explain these
differences, Plato failed to grasp the possibility that Nehamas points out,
namely, that a complete and perfect instance (of a universal) is always
imperfectly instantiated. Instead of analyzing and asking questions about
the sensible world, Plato altered his characterization of the forms to meet
the needs of the problem.
Secondly, Plato conflated UF and SF as a result of supposing that
the criterion by which we judge a property and the abstraction of all
existing properties was the same. In otiher words, Plato believes that the
forms are what aUow the possibility of making the sensible world
intelligible. But he recognizes that predicates are general terms, abstract,
and also intelligible. Put in this way,i t is clear that they are not necessarily
the same thing; but it is easy to see how this was not evident to Plato. He
was confronted with a certain epistemic problem. The sensible world
exhibits constant change. While we may not be able to ascribe to Plato a
Heraclitean concern, we can supply some evidence that Plato was
addressing certain kinds of change. For example, Socrates is tall standing
near Alcibiades yet short next to Xenophon. The table is reddish-brown in
the morning, but has a bluish tint at dusk. Another kind of change that
may have concerned Plato is as follows: If I am able to identify a chair at
any given time, then what I caU a chair at one time is in some sense
different than what I call a chair at another time. Yet, I am able to
recognize both as chairs, and more notably, recognize something which I
^ee Rep. Book X
'See 3-4 above.
Plato's Theories of Form 9
have never seen before as a chair/ Plato assumes that some kind of a priori
faculty is necessary in order to recognize some property or predicate in the
sensible world. This faculty develops into the Theory of Recollection, and
the Theory of Recollection depends upon the forms.
Now,t here is an ambiguity in cases of simple properties that seems
to have led Plato to introduce universals into his solution to the Epistemic
Problem. One's ability to recognize red is easily explained given the
(mental) presence of redness. That there exists a thing 'redness' seems
intuitively necessary to presuppose in order for there to be red things. If
this is so, then some kind of appeal to redness would be necessary for one
to identify a red thing. It is not clear in this case that the universal, an
abstract and intelligible entity, may not be the criterion for judging a
particular thing. On the other hand, complex predicates do not appeal to
universals for knowability.® The form of a shuttle must be a standard. The
universal of shuttle is only something we abstract from existing cases. We
must have already been able to understand what a shuttle is before we
abstract from existing cases. Consequently, a universal will not serve as a
criterion for judgment in cases sudr as this one since it is not logically
presupposed. Apparently,P lato has lumped any and all kinds of predicates
imder one theory. His original insight with regard to simple predicates is
extended over a larger body of predicates that cannot accommodate it. But
before accepting these conclusions, we can still supply further evidence for
the fact that Plato did generate forms from the universals of simple
predicates.
Ross gives a coherent account of the development of the theory of
forms in his Plato's Theory of Ideas. He sees the move from UP to SF as a
development corresponding with the shiftf rom the early Socratic dialogues
to the middle dialogues. While I do not agree that Plato abandoned the
notion that the forms act as universals, the shift certainly supports my
theory that simple universals acted as forms. First, I have already shown
that Plato assumes that the forms in the middle dialogues act in some
respects as universals. Next, in the early dialogues, Plato writes of the
forms as immanent, and he has Socrates ask for general accounts of the
qualities in question. Giving an account of universals will serve Socrates's
purposes much more readily in these contexts.® But as Plato begins to
move away from general accounts and into epistemological and
'The preceding account of the epistemic difficulty I will refer to simply as the
Epistemic Problem.
'By 'complex,' I mean here that the predicate can be analyzed into simple predicates.
'Still, it is important to note that Plato does have Socrates speak of standards as early
as the Euthyphro (6 D-E). I take this, though, as further evidence that Plato was prone to
the confusion of standards and universals.
10 Scott Hendricks
metaphysical problems, two things seem to occur. One, the forms are
construed as having properties not predicable of universals; and two, the
functions of the forms that fall into UF get separated from the sensible
world along with the form as a standard.
UF cannot provide a solution for the Epistemic Problem. On the
other hand, universals neatly fit the description Plato wants to give to the
forms. They are abstract, applying to any given sensible case; and they are
intelligible, invisible, etc. The root of the problem appears to be that Plato
took it for granted that the forms, as originally formulated, would solve
any existing epistemological, metaphysical, or ethical question. In fact,
different solutions may be required for the different problems. Ross makes
an important observation in noting that SF allows Plato a more general
theory of forms (231). In other words the standards can be coherently
applied to more epistemic problems than the universals can. But in any
case, it is clear that a single a priori faculty, or criterion for judgment,
cannot be either abstract predicates or ideal standards of properties if Plato
wants to generate scientific knowledge.'"
While it may seem ad hoc to suppose that somehow all of the
confusions outlined above contributed towards Plato's conflating UF and
SF, it is important to note that we may underestimate the complexity of the
problem if we ignore most of these obscurities. If one is forced to focus on
one of the possible reasons given above for Plato's mistake,t hen one is left
with a weak accoxmt for Plato's motivation. Of course, the important move
in establishing that Plato conflated the two theories is merely showing that
the forms function both as standards and as universals. Proving that this
is the correct interpretation entails showing that the respective functions
are incommensurable and that an interpretation of the forms that refuses
to incorporate this cannot accoimt for all the information Plato gives us.
Finally^ speculating as to why Plato conflated UF and SF completes this
accoimt, and allows us to understand more fully Plato's conception of the
theory of forms.
*°A rigorous scientific theory would have to give a more complete account of
relationships than universals could possibly attain to using the paradigms that would be
amiable to UF such as the genus/species method. For example, a form of a shuttle may
allow us to recognize the shuttle, but it does not clearly explain how a shuttle works.
Plato could say that this knowledge is contained in the form, but this is still not the
explanation itskf. The theory of forms (either UF or SF) seems unable to provide minds
with the kinds of conceptual schemes that provide minds with the simplest knowledge
about math. Plato is unclear about such things as logical connectors and exactly how they
would be accommodated in a theory of forms. Plato's emphasis on mathematics in the
later dialogues focuses unfruitfully on accidental projjerties. In the case of SF, we would
universalize the account, which would merely bring us back to dealing with universals.
In any case, Plato failed to generate a compelling scientific ontology and his inability to
make a number of important distinctions is at least in part to blame.
Plato's Theories of Forms 11
Appendix
Appendix A: Argument from the Phaedo that the Forms are distinct.
1. The sensible particular appears sometimes as F and sometimes -F.
(74b)
2. The form of F (F-ness) is never -F. (74c; Definition)
3. X is identical to Y iff everytiiing that can be predicated of X can
be predicated of Y and the converse. (Assumed Condition for
Identity)
4. The form of F is not the same as the sensible particular. (74c; by
1, 2, and 3)
Note: There are three terms in the above argument the sensible particular,
F, and the form of F.
Works Qted
Bluck, R S. Plato's Phaedo: Translation and Commentary. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1955.
—. "Forms as Standards." Phronesis. 2 (1957): 115-127.
Malcolm, J. Plato on the Self-Predication of Forms: Early and Middle Dialogues.
Oxford: Clarendon, 1991.
McKeon, R ed. The Basic Works of Aristotle. New York: Random House,
1941.
Nehamas, A. "Plato on the Imperfection of the Sensible World." American
Philosophical Quarterly. 12 (1975): 105-117.
—. "Predication and Forms of Opposites in the Phaedo." The Review of
Metaphysics. 26 (1972-1973): 461-491.
Ross, D. Plato's Theory of Ideas. Oxford, Clarendon, 1951.