Aporia vol. 17 no. 2—2007
Vindicating a Critique
Jason a. Hills
I n “Reference and Definite Descriptions,” Keith Donnellan distinguishes
between attributive and referential uses of definite descriptions. He uses
this distinction to show that Bertrand Russell’s theory of definite descrip-
tions fails to account for the referential use. Saul Kripke, in “Speaker’s
Reference and Semantic Reference,” claims that to successfully provide
a counterexample to Russell’s theory, Donnellan’s distinction should be
semantic rather than pragmatic. Kripke then argues that Donnellan’s refer-
ential use is actually pragmatic—not sematic—and therefore does not refute
Russell’s theory.
A significant part of this debate concerns truth-values. Kripke argues
that Donnellan’s assignment of truth-value to sentences such as “Her hus-
band is kind to her,” where “her husband” is used referentially, does not
differ from the assignment given by Russell’s theory. I will consider this
claim; using the concept of analysis I will argue that the two theories do of-
fer different accounts of truth-value. I will also argue that even a pragmatic
ambiguity, as given by Donnellan, is sufficient to prove that Russell does
not offer a complete account of reference.
Russell’s Theory, In Brief
Without going into detail nor considering his argumentation in fa-
vor of it, I will briefly outline Russell’s theory. In his essay “On Denoting,”
Russell presents a method of translating English sentences into a format
where the logical proposition contained in a sentence is not hidden by the
grammar of normal English sentences (213–14). The grammatical similar-
ity of “Elizabeth is old” and “the Queen of England is old” suggests that
Jason A. Hills is a senior studying philosophy at Brigham Young University. His
interests include philosophy of language, logic, and philosophy of mathematics.
2 Jason a. Hills
the denoting phrase “the Queen of England” fills the same role in the sec-
ond sentence as “Elizabeth” does in the first. In the proposition expressed,
“Elizabeth” represents a person, so it might be assumed that “the Queen
of England” does as well. Actually, the propositions expressed by these two
sentences differ greatly. The proposition for the first one has the subject
“Elizabeth” and the predicate “is old.” On the other hand, the short ver-
sion of Russell’s rendering of the second sentence is “x rules England and x
is female and x is human and x is old, and ‘if y rules England and y is female
and y is old then y is x’ is always true (of y) is sometimes true (of x).”1
Russell is particularly concerned with problems of nonexistence in
connection with denoting terms (215). His rendering of sentences such as
“The present King of France is old,” shows that these sentences are false,
as they fail on the first half of the proposition “there is one and only one
King of France” (218). The conjunction of this false statement with the oth-
er half of the proposition, whether true or false, still yields a false statement.
Donnellan’s Claim
Donnellan distinguishes between two uses of definite descriptions:
the attributive use and the referential use (249). Among other things, he
claims that Russell’s theory, at best, only gives an account of the attribu-
tive use—it does not account for the referential use of definite descriptions.
Distinguishing between denoting and referring, he also argues that while
Russell might give a correct account of denotation, he fails to do so for
reference (253).
Let us look at Donnellan’s distinction between attributive and referen-
tial uses. The attributive use is employed by a speaker in a more general way
to talk about whoever or whatever fits the description. Consider the follow-
ing example: At a party he is hosting, the chairman of the local Teetotalers
Union is informed that someone is drinking a martini. He asks his informer,
“Who is the man drinking a martini?” The chairman does not have a par-
ticular individual in mind when he asks this, but rather is concerned with
identifying whoever fits the description (250).
The referential use, however, is used by a speaker as a device to pick
out a particular object. Consider another party. An interesting-looking man
is holding a martini glass. A woman sees him and asks her friend, “Who is
the man drinking a martini?” She is not interested in whether or not this
1For the sake of convenience, I will hereafter use shorter versions of the Russellian translations. For
example, the above translation becomes “there is one and only one Queen of England, and that
one is old.” Shortened versions should be treated as placeholders for the actual Russell translations
and not be mistaken for them.
Vindicating a critique 3
particular man is drinking a martini; rather, her interest is in pointing
out a particular man—“the man drinking a martini” is simply a tool for do-
ing so. Note that it is not even essential that the man fit the description; the
reference can still work if, say, the man in question were actually drinking
water from his martini glass.
Although Russell’s theory might account for attributive uses of a sen-
tence, it fails to do so for referential uses. For Russell, a statement of the
form “The f is y” (or, for that matter, any statement about “the f”) logically
entails that there is one and only one f. This does not work for referential
uses, as they clearly refer to objects, even when no object uniquely satisfies
the description.
Donnellan therefore suggests that we make a distinction between
denotation and reference. He suggests that we use Russell’s definition
of denoting (“a definite description denotes an entity if that entity fits the
description uniquely”), but that we also allow for reference to take place
separate from denotation (253). Let us adapt one of Donnellan’s examples
to illustrate this. Suppose I were to say in 2007, “The winner of the 2008
Presidential Election will be from a minority group.” It seems that my words
denote something, because there really is one and only one object which
will satisfy “the winner of the 2008 Presidential Election.” Suppose that
Barack Obama were to win the election; could we really say that I referred
to him with my sentence? Now let us suppose that Mitt Romney were to
win; could we say that I referred to him? No matter who happens to win the
election, I did not know who it would be at the time that I made my state-
ment, so I could not have referred to either of them—that is, I could not
have been using “the winner of the 2008 Presidential Election” as a tool
to point out a particular person. It seems preferable to make a distinction
between denoting and referring.
Kripke’s Rebuttal
In his paper “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference,” Saul
Kripke claims that Donnellan’s views do not adequately argue against
Russell’s theory (263). He argues for this claim in at least two ways: (1) the
examination of truth-value and (2) the distinction between semantics and
pragmatics. First, he looks at truth-value in cases of intensional context
(254). For example, if a person sees a man being kind to a woman and
remarks that “her husband is kind to her” while the man is in fact not
her husband, and especially if her actual husband were cruel or if she
had none, it is presumed that Donnellan and Russell would give different
accounts of truth-value. Under Russell’s view, it seems we would have to
4 Jason a. Hills
say that the sentence is false. Under Donnellan’s, we would say that since
the speaker was using the term “her husband” referentially, he made a true
statement about the man he saw. But Kripke notes that Donnellan is hesi-
tant to say very clearly that this man’s statement “her husband is kind to
her” is true—and this becomes even more difficult to sustain in intensional
contexts (253–54).
Suppose that John was the speaker who said, “Her husband is kind
to her,” mistakenly using “her husband” to describe this other man. Would
we want to report this occasion by saying, “John said that her husband is
kind to her”? Suppose that this other man were her lover; would we want to
report it by saying, “John said that her lover is kind to her”? It is difficult
to decide what the original statement was so that we can report it properly.
It is equally difficult to decide if the original statement is true or false.
Without being able to say that the statement is true or false, we can ob-
serve no difference in the truth-values of the views of Russell and Donnellan
(except perhaps that Donnellan fails to give one in these cases); and if we
observe no difference in truth-values, then Donnellan has not produced a
counterexample to Russell’s theory.
Kripke’s second point—and to be fair, the focus of his paper—is a dis-
tinction between speaker’s reference and semantic reference (254). He claims
that Donnellan’s referential use is a pragmatic—rather than semantic—notion,
and that when something is referred to other than the object satisfying the
conditions of the denoting phrase, we can accurately speak of two references:
the speaker’s intended reference, and the semantic reference given by the de-
noting phrase (255). As I intend to grant Kripke this point, but to show that
this can be taken to correspond with Donnellan’s reference and denotation,
I shall not here give Kripke’s argumentation.
Kripke then shows that if a Russellian language were a natural lan-
guage, it would be possible for speakers to use it pragmatically, just as we
use English (257–58). Suppose, for example, that the woman at the party
had said to her friend, “The man drinking a martini is tall.” If she were
a Russellian speaker, she might say, every bit as naturally as we speak nor-
mal English, “There is one and only one person at this party drinking a
martini, and that one is tall.” Even though the semantics of that language
would point at someone other than the speaker’s intended reference or at
no one at all, she would still be successful in pragmatically referring to her
intended target as she communicates with her friend. Russell’s theory, then,
deals with this situation as well as Donnellan’s view, and given two theories
that explain phenomena equally well, we should choose the one which
does not posit an ambiguity (Kripke 259).
Vindicating a critique 5
A Note on the Scope of Theories
In order to make his argument that Donnellan does not contradict
Russell, Kripke finds it necessary to make several assumptions regarding the
scope of the theories in question. For example, he regards Russell’s theory
as a theory about English (semantics), and he considers Donnellan’s distinc-
tion between referential and attributive uses as being semantic in nature
when used by Donnellan, hoping to contradict Russell (254, 257). He ad-
mits, however, that there may be other possible interpretations of the scope
of these terms in Donnellan’s view, saying, “I therefore am not sure whether
I am expressing disagreement with him even here” (249).
We might, for example, consider Russell’s theory as a theory of refer-
ence. It looks like Russell was trying to give a theory of reference—at the
very least, people have thought that he was doing so. If this is the case, then
Donnellan does succeed in contradicting Russell’s theory, and Kripke’s
noting that the referential use is a pragmatic notion is irrelevant because
even though speaker’s reference is different from semantic reference, it is
still reference. Russell’s theory fails to give an account of speaker’s reference
and how it works. This could be what Donnellan means when he consid-
ers how Russell’s theory might account for the attributive use but certainly
fails to do so for the referential. Also, Donnellan certainly seems to distin-
guish between referring and denoting in much the same way that Kripke
distinguishes between speaker’s reference and semantic reference. Donnellan
accepts Russell’s semantic definition of denotation, and he proposes an
idea of reference that would allow for pragmatic considerations. At the very
least, each of Donnellan’s terms seems to be coextensive with the Kripkean
term I propose to be its counterpart.
I agree with Kripke here—and I presume Donnellan could as well—
that if we regard Russell’s theory as a theory of English semantics, then
Donnellan’s view offers no counterexample. So, perhaps we should clar-
ify Donnellan’s conclusion and say instead that although Russell’s theory
might give a correct account of semantic reference (what Donnellan calls
“denoting”), it fails to account for pragmatic reference and therefore is not
a complete theory of reference.
Truth-value
One of the interesting claims made by Kripke which does not depend
upon our regarding Russell’s theory as a theory of English is the assignment
of truth-value to a proposition. This is where Kripke proposes we disregard
Donnellan’s disclaimer that referential and attributive uses should not be
6 Jason a. Hills
seen to posit a semantic ambiguity but instead a pragmatic one. Kripke
claims that this does not represent how Donnellan actually treats these
terms throughout the bulk of his paper (254). I will quote Kripke here
and produce a counterexample. Speaking of Donnellan’s disclaimer and
his conclusion that Russell deals with attributive but not referential cases,
Kripke says:
It is not “uses,” in some pragmatic sense, but senses of
a sentence which can be analyzed. If the sentence is not
(syntactically or) semantically ambiguous, it has only one
analysis; to say that it has two distinct analyses is to attri-
bute a syntactic or semantic ambiguity to it. (254)
This is simply not the case. There are a multitude of examples from prag-
matics in which more than one analysis is possible. Take, for example, the
question “Do you know the time?” Let us assume that we have eliminated
all possible semantic and syntactic ambiguities from this question. Is there
only one analysis possible? No, I can understand this question in multiple
ways. Certainly someone unfamiliar with our cultural usage of this ques-
tion could give a different analysis of the question asked and respond with
“yes” instead of giving the time (“5:45pm”) or at the very least be puzzled
about the correct response to give.
Kripke might reply that I am not using the term “analysis” properly,
to which I would ask how I should use it. Presumably, he would want me to
say that it applies to what the words mean, rather than to what the speaker
intends. This is a nice interpretation; it assumes everything Kripke argues
in the above quotation, making it tautologically true. The only problem is
that it seems to be an unnecessarily limited application of the term “analy-
sis.” I suggest that every possible proposition that a string of words can be
utilized to communicate represents a possible analysis. Some of these dif-
ferent propositions are based on syntactic ambiguities, some on semantics,
and some are even differences due to pragmatics, but each proposition is a
possible analysis of the sentence.1
It seems, then, that we can take Donnellan’s disclaimer at face value
and presume that he really is positing a pragmatic ambiguity rather than
a semantic one. In this case, Donnellan’s view gives a different account of
truth-value than Russell’s does. Let us look at the party example again. The
woman is speaking with her friend about the tall man she sees holding a
martini glass. Let us suppose, however, that there is only water in his glass
1If it were still insisted I not use “analysis” in the way I am using it here, I would ask for another
term to answer to the “possible propositions” described above. In this paper, I will continue using
“analysis” as I have defined it.
Vindicating a critique 7
and that there is, unbeknownst to the woman, a short man at the other end
of the room who is actually drinking a martini. When the woman says,
“The man drinking the martini is tall,” she is saying something true of the
man she intended to refer to—that is, if we analyze the statement to mean
something like “That man is tall,” then she said something true. Of course,
while it seems clear that the woman is referring to the man she was look-
ing at, we must say that the semantic reference (denotation) of “the man
drinking a martini” points elsewhere, to the short man at the other end of
the room. Russell’s semantic account of reference would conclude that the
woman’s statement is false, as that man is certainly not tall.
Some of Kripke’s argumentation remains to be dealt with. He notes
that Donnellan is rightly reluctant in saying of these sorts of statements that
the statement is true or false. While Donnellan might say that the woman
said something true of that man, he would not say that it is true that “The
man drinking a martini is tall.” But this is not as damaging to Donnellan as
it might seem. Indeed, this type of problem (being unable to assign a truth-
value directly to an unanalyzed statement) seems true of many ambiguities.
The statement “I have never touched a mouse” is semantically ambiguous—
or to eliminate any difficulties possibly resulting from using the indexical
“I,” let us say, “Abraham Lincoln never touched a mouse.” I presume that
the sixteenth President of the United States of America had occasion to
touch one of those rodents; but I do not believe he ever saw a computer,
nor any input device for one. Here is a semantic ambiguity; and, strictly
speaking, it does not seem we can say that the statement “Abraham Lincoln
never touched a mouse” is either true or false, as it is not perfectly clear
which type of mouse we are talking about. Though once we have made our
analysis of the sentence, we can talk about each possible proposition as be-
ing either true or false.2 If we give the analysis that “mouse” is used for the
rodent, then the proposition is false. If we give the analysis that “mouse” is
the input device, then the proposition is true. If we decide that “mouse”
is intentionally ambiguous and applies to both, then the sentence is false.
In each case, we cannot truly talk about the truth or falsity of the statement
itself—only of the propositions expressed.
It might also be good to note that our decision about which semantic
analysis to make is actually influenced by pragmatics anyway. Neither the
semantics nor the syntax of the sentence gives us enough information to
decide on one analysis over the other. Rather, it is our knowledge about
Abraham Lincoln and when he lived, as well as certain expectations
about how other speakers make relevant statements, which encourages the
rodent interpretation over the computer interpretation.
2This is probably akin to, but perhaps more inclusive than, P. F. Strawson’s distinction between a
sentence and the use of a sentence.
8 Jason a. Hills
Other cases of ambiguity, including pragmatic cases like those pre-
sented by Donnellan, work in much the same way as this semantic case. If
by “the man drinking a martini” we mean “that man over there,” then the
proposition is true. But if we mean “the man fitting the semantic descrip-
tion of ‘the man drinking a martini,’” (that is, if we are using “the man
drinking a martini” attributively) then the proposition is false. It does not
seem to be any fault of Donnellan’s view that it cannot speak of a statement
as being true or false—strictly speaking, other theories dealing with any sort
of ambiguity cannot either. And when it looks like they can speak of a
statement being true or false, it is because either all possible analyses will
produce the same result, or at least all pragmatically reasonable analyses
do—but even here, “The statement is true” is only shorthand for saying that
all possible or reasonable propositions are true.
As a final note, Kripke also produces instances of intensional context
as he argues against Donnellan. One example he gives is my saying, “Jones
said the police were around the corner.” He mentions that Jones may
have said it as a warning, but that there is no need for me to report it as a
warning. Similarly, there is no need to report a sentence as having either ref-
erential or attributive sense in it. So going back to the party example, there
would be no reason, according to Kripke, for me to report the woman’s
statement differently than “She said that the man drinking a martini was
tall.” He contrasts this with cases of semantic ambiguity where I must use
the same sense as the original speaker; for example, if I say, “Jones denied
he was ever at a bank,” I need to use “bank” in the same sense he did.
Again, this does not seem to be the case. While it is correct that I do
not need to have the same intentions as the original speaker, it does seem
that I need to communicate enough information for a person to correctly
disambiguate the statement. Even the semantic example utilizes pragmatics
as we decide which sense to give to “bank.” We recognize that “deny” typi-
cally regards some sort of allegation and are therefore led to conclude that
Jones referred to a financial institution, since financial institutions seem
to be more likely associated with these sorts of allegations than sides of
rivers (though, of course, both are possible analyses). We could have easily
provided this kind of pragmatic clue for the first example by saying some-
thing like, “Jones warned [them] that the police were around the corner.”
If our goal is to correctly represent the utterance made, we should include
these sorts of pragmatic clues as we report statements. In the case of the
woman’s, we might use some sort of circumlocution and bring her utter-
ance into direct context, saying, “She thought that the man she was looking
at was drinking a martini and so she said, ‘The man drinking a martini
is tall.’” Yes, it is long-winded, but then, it is no longer than a Russellean
Vindicating a critique 9
translation. It also has the advantage of communicating the relevant details
of the utterance, both semantic and pragmatic.
Perhaps this answer to truth-value in cases of intensional context
is not entirely satisfactory. Nevertheless, an entire account of intensional
context does not seem necessary to provide a counterexample to Russell’s
theory. Donnellan can still grant that intensional contexts produce difficul-
ties without having to concede his main point, because examples in direct
context still produce different truth-values. Also, it seems that the difficulty
involved with referential uses in intensional context comes primarily from
our underreporting the pragmatic aspect of the utterance rather than
from an inability to correctly report the referential or attributive use.
In conclusion, Kripke’s attempt to show that the distinction between
referential and attributive uses must be taken as a semantic ambiguity in
order to be consistent with Donnellan’s claims is flawed. Donnellan’s
posited ambiguity can therefore be considered pragmatic in nature—as
he intended—without impacting his claims about Russell’s theory. If we
consider Donnellan’s view on the grounds he proposes, then it provides
substantial counterexamples to Russell’s theory, showing that although
Russell’s theory might offer a complete account of denotation, it does not
do so for reference.3
3I would like to thank Professor David Jensen of Brigham Young University for his advice on and
discussion about this article.
Works Cited
Donnellan, Keith. “Reference and Definite Descriptions.” The Philosophy of
Language. Ed. A. P. Martinich. New York: Oxford UP, 2001. 247–59.
Kripke, Saul. “Speaker’s Reference and Semantic Reference.” The Philosophy of
Language. Ed. A. P. Martinich. New York: Oxford UP, 1990. 248–67.
Russell, Bertrand. “On Denoting.” The Philosophy of Language. Ed. A. P.
Martinich. New York: Oxford UP, 2001. 212–20.