Aporia vol. 10 no. 2—2000
Novelty, Ritual, and Redemption:
Toward a Whiteheadian Aesthetic
Jeremy richard hoffart
With its intricate submergence into the crevices of process, cre-
ativity, and the extensive continuum, Whitehead’s metaphysi-
cal speculation is most useful in its microcosmic implications.
Conversely, some of these broader applications may further transpose
significance on their initial structure, not only derivative of process, but
informing it. Such is the parallel of aesthetic emergence, drawing from a
speculation of a more conventional “creativity” than Whitehead usually
refers to, but nonetheless unveiling metaphysical peculiarities that call for
clarification. Specifically, I aim to tie in Whitehead’s aesthetic implications
and theological conjectures as converging factors in what Whitehead rec-
ognizes as “the ultimate evil [ellipses] that the past fades, that time is a
‘perpetual perishing’” (Process and Reality 216, hereafter cited as PR). For
aesthetics, this perishing is one of content, a postmodern glut amid a
limitless structure; for theology, the issue resides in the tension between
God’s primordial and consequent nature, an upward spiral of luring, con-
crescing, and perishing (Whiteheadian terms for coming into being and
passing on). Our reaction to this primal flux varies from mellow nostalgia
to nihilistic angst, and the nature of this angst often shares the role as
either a justification of that nihilism or a call for religious redemption.
The latter, we would hope, seems to be the prevalent conviction. Yet, apart
from theological speculation, where do we find that redemption? It seems,
on whatever terms of God, love, beauty and faith we appeal to, even from
a secular standpoint, the emergence of redemption finds its public voice in
the expression of aesthetics.
Artistic expression, the nexus of narrative, imagery, sound, and
movement, is one of the strongest social bonds in human nature, providing
a canopy of meaning over the details of experience. Part of its appeal is not
only in its indication of significance, but in its discovery, invention, and
26 Jeremy richard hoffart
potential for progress. Aesthetic emergence, in general, offers a vivid answer
to Hume’s cited phenomenon, “for ideas to go beyond their correspondent
impressions” (qtd. in PR 86). While Hume limits this phenomenon to a
rare “instance,” Whitehead allows a broader, more pervasive potentiality,
maintaining that “there is an origination of conceptual feeling, admitting
or rejecting whatever is apt for feeling by reason of its germaneness to
the basic data” (PR 87). This, in application, lends aesthetic creativity its
inspirational character.
Though all creation is informed—and thus, limited—by past con-
crescence, the moment when content is inspired beyond canalization is
when aesthetic emergence truly takes flight. One theory of balancing
form and content calls for a paradox of this emergence, that it must be
at once surprising and inevitable. In aesthetic emergence, there is a certain
momentum forming a nexus beyond the artist. “Feelings are ‘vectors’,” says
Whitehead, “for they feel what is there and transform it into what is here”
(PR 87). Balance between the artist’s initial conception and subsequent
lure of discovery strives to attain a mutual vector in this respect, a synergy
that fuses the dissonant approximations into a beautiful orchestration at
its highest achievement, or else crumbles into an incoherent jumble, at its
lowest.
This heightened sense of collaborative emergence may share its char-
acteristics most with Whitehead’s “hybrid” prehension, which he describes
as “the prehension by one subject of a conceptual prehension, or of an
‘impure’ prehension, belonging to the mentality of another subject” (PR
107). For illustration, I cite a seldom considered art form, improvisational
theater. Two actors step onto the stage with little or no knowledge of the
content about to evolve between them, and through established guidelines,
give-and-take, and quick wits to adapt action to unexpected prehensions,
they create a coherent, unified scene. Though imperfect, this process
creates unity in the resulting emergence through conceptual objectifica-
tion of shared feeling, of established values, and perhaps on some level, of
the hybrid physical prehension of God. This mystic self-effacement pools
the combined conscious prehensions into a process both including the
artist and operating quite beyond her.
As the expression evolves, the conceptual prehensions emerge
as actualities determine an explicit concrescence that forms a narrative
“society” of the artwork, in the sense that every element framed within
the work shares a “defining characteristic” by virtue of “the environment
provided by the society itself” (PR 89). That is, assuming there is unity of
significance within the narrative, the shared characteristic emerges in that
purpose. Aesthetic emergence in this light fits into Whitehead’s descrip-
tion of “life,” as “the coordination of the mental spontaneities throughout
Novelty, ritual, aNd redemptioN 27
the occasions of a society” which are “directed to a common objective amid
varying circumstances” (Adventures of Ideas 207). This common objective
demands a give and take among the artist’s conception and discovery, po-
tentially sacrificing millions of conceptual prehensions with every decision.
“The art of progress,” says Whitehead, “is to preserve order amid
change, and to preserve change amid order. Life refuses to be embalmed
alive” (PR 339). Aesthetic emergence juggles form and content as mutually
informing, and discovery in any art form demands that the novelty be
authentic if it is to survive at all. It is surprising. It is inevitable. It punctu-
ates being with the narrative, which is always novel, always becoming, like
laughter echoing through a mirrored hall.
II. Poetic Insight as Propositional Evocation
The function of art as both unexpected and inevitable, juggling a
paradox of conformity and novelty, is that it replaces expectations with
truth. Hovering between past concrescence and emergent possibility,
obvious fact and elliptical suggestion, we often incorporate the device of
poetic insight as an amplification of understanding. To note, the use of
the term “poetic” does not restrict its application to literature or aesthet-
ics. Rather, we apply metaphor, simile, and unusual syntax in common
experience to offer fresh insight to our experience. We may say, “That
politician is a snake,” or, “That class is hell,” evoking several layers of
symbolic reference without giving the statement a second thought. Poetic
insight, whether novel or cliché, is ingrained in our intellectual process, as
Whitehead recognizes, “to symbolize the sort of physical feelings necessary
to indicate the logical subjects of the proposition” (PR 260).
Consider this aching, complex image from Jane Kenyon: “Like a
crow who smells hot blood / you came flying to pull me out / of the
glowing stream.” (23). From the context of the poem’s title, “Having it
Out with Melancholy,” we know she is addressing her personification of
depression, sickness, and struggle. She is assigning overlapping objectifica-
tions of these emotions with the vivid, concrete portrayal of a crow and a
glowing stream of blood. Whether these associations strike the prehending
subject as effective depends on “whether or not the possible understanding
conforms with the facts of experience,” as Hosinski says (122).
The conformation or lack thereof in the prehending subject’s experi-
ence constitutes a visceral reaction, below explication or judgment, and
hence is what I term subjective resonance. If conforming—that is, relating—
to past experience, this description carries an emotional flood, bursting
with the weight of all concrescent experience that has come before it. “An
28 Jeremy richard hoffart
intense experience is an aesthetic fact,” says Whitehead, “and its categoreal
conditions are to be generalized from aesthetic laws in particular arts” (PR
279). Whether or not the prehending subject has the conforming experi-
ence to call upon, the subject can, at some level, recognize the pattern
set by the comparison, and can at least attain a vague absorption of the
intended meaning.
In the face of fleeting actuality, perishing worlds, and private
emotions, we call upon poetic insight to amplify the nexus of subjective
experience to a universal value. “This is the feeling of the objective im-
mortality inherent in the nature of actuality,” Whitehead says (PR 278).
Beyond mere enjoyment of aesthetic appeal, such an approach to evocation
also dominates rhetoric, advertising, and appeals to ethical action and
social justice. It is one thing to mention the abstract statistic that 1.2
million Tibetans have died as a result of Chinese occupation. It is another
thing to read the Dalai Lama’s vivid account of a young boy screaming
as a military officer forces him to pull the trigger of a pistol, the blood of
his own father splashing across his terrified face. The attention to detail
here, while disturbing and not entirely necessary, certainly evokes more
emotional momentum than a static figure.
Poetic insight’s vivid persuasion also carries some inherent dangers,
particularly in coercion and overly emotional rhetoric. While some cases
of inauthentic rhetoric are made obvious by investigation of the support-
ing data, much of “error arises by reason of operations which lie below
consciousness, though they emerge into consciousness and lie open for
criticism” (PR 272). The critical point arrives between the origination of
the physical feelings in the false judgment and the subsequent action based
on that judgment. Many “obvious” conclusions arrive from sound logic
based on a shaky premise, and unless we prefer the soothing rhetoric of
beer ads and political campaigns, only a heightened sense of awareness will
filter out such fallacies.
One of the most polarizing elements of objectification rises out
of the application of subjective resonance—that visceral echo of the past
bleeding into causal efficacy and presentational immediacy to render every
experience at once vividly private, and yet, necessarily public. This feeling
complies with Whitehead’s description of “bodily efficacy,” as “the feeling
of the sense datum as generally implicated in the whole region” (PR 313).
We’ve all had arguments over whether a film or poem was good; we assume
distinct taste is a stamp of our human uniqueness. Yet, given the stratified
din of opinions in so many realms of aesthetics, moral judgments, and
“common” sense, even among those of equal experience and education,
there clearly exists a more subtle influence on our judgment than conscious
knowledge.
Novelty, ritual, aNd redemptioN 29
“The canons of art,” says Whitehead, “are merely the expression,
in specialized forms, of the requisites for depth of experience” (PR 317).
Whitehead adds that these requisites also appear in the principles of
morality; indeed, in nearly every metaphysical ideal—truth, beauty, justice,
and so forth—these “requisites for depth” emerge. Yet without awareness
of our own methods of appraising these requisites, we are left to subjec-
tive irrelevance: “Well, I guess you have your opinion, and I have mine.”
This frustration aborts clarification and eschews the proposed solution of
figuring where, exactly, the subjective grasp deludes the sensa in question.
When I read the novel, Great Expectations, I can observe the objective
data of its prose, its imagery, and its lyrical wit. I can even appraise these
data as structurally and aesthetically well executed. I cannot, however,
truthfully say that I like the book. Whether this is due to my physical and
temporal distance from Victorian England or my lack of relation to societal
hypocrisy is irrelevant. What is undeniable is that I lack the subjective
resonance—an initially unconscious prehension—to constitute my involve-
ment and subsequent identity with the aesthetic truths proposed. So far,
I am concerned with the primitive stages of this reaction, as Whitehead
describes, “a sensum is felt physically with emotional enjoyment of its
sheer individual essence” (PR 314). But this is not an isolated feeling. The
conditioning factors, unfortunately underplayed in Whitehead’s analysis,
account for the fact that “a red cloak may often be associated with a feeling
of red irritation” (PR 315).
In addition to archetypal associations of certain qualities (red symbol-
izes anger), this leads into the conscious appraisal of subjective resonance.
When I drop Great Expectations out of boredom and begin reading The
French Lieutenant’s Woman, I am suddenly galvanized by the lyrical prose,
the postmodern enhancement, and the mosaic of swirling influence. Here
is another story of Victorian England—albeit with a distinctly transformed
style—and since my experience as a critic and philosopher are in sync with
the author’s approach, I transpose more significance, more quality on this
work of art. Whitehead notes, “It is only by reason of the fortunate depen-
dence of the experient and of these contemporary actualities on a common
past, that presentational immediacy is more than a barren aesthetic display
(PR 324).
It is the layers and texture of past feeling, concrescence, and
judgment that cast flesh on the bones of a given nexus. This trait is part
of our function as enduring objects and remains necessary for acclimation
and aggregate knowledge. The problem of this application, however, is that
it often applies these private feelings to interpretation of public realities.
Subsequently, we begin to impose our own tastes and judgments on others,
indignant that our focal point isn’t recognized as the template of reason.
30 Jeremy richard hoffart
This stratification results from what Whitehead recognizes as (Descartes’
account of experiencing the external world), “a ‘judicium’ which calls
into play the totality of our experience beyond those prehensions” (PR
325). Ignorance of this totality causes the false transferal of a subjectively
resonated past on the presentational immediacy in question and offers one
clue among the many stumbling blocks of subjective aim.
III. Subjectivist Dynamics of Aesthetic Prehension
In an effort to move toward a moderate transcendence of the subjec-
tivist delusion of aesthetic appraisal, to cast off “the drab grey of everyday
experience,” improvisation and education theorist Keith Johnstone
describes an exercise that he claims causes students to suddenly experi-
ence their surroundings with increased vibrancy, immediacy, and novelty.
They simply defy linguistic conventions, running from one object to the
next and assigning a label to their prehension that is entirely unrelated.
In Whitehead’s terms, this alters canalized perception, opening up poten-
tiality of objectification by undermining the casual efficacy of categoriza-
tion. It endorses the notion that “consciousness is the feeling of negation”
(PR 161). In the context of Johnstone’s purpose, then, the origin of novel
aesthetic emergence gives a vibrant illustration involved in the dynamics
of the subjectivist principle.
One primary characteristic of conditioned prehension surges from
the primal, emotional association of the object, which, over time, carries
the danger of deluded perception. That is, the labels, associations, and in-
teraction mingled with the prehension rise in tandem with the emotional
tinge, and the former may become stubbornly imposed with each subse-
quent prehension due to the subconscious associations of the emotion. Yet
Whitehead rightly maintains that “emotion . . . is not bare emotion. It is
emotion interpreted, integrated, and transformed into higher categories”
(PR 163). Emotion is the end product of a filtering process. If that process
is ignored, the initial feeling carries through from prehension to reaction
unheeded, deluded.
Subsequently, the unaware subject will apply that deluded percep-
tion of emotional influence to an appraisal that defines not the aesthetic
quality of the prehension, but its auxiliary associations. Emotions char-
acteristically evoke related and detached informants of contemporary ex-
perience, thus distracting from the actual occasion, causing a premature
objectification. This reaction constitutes what Whitehead recognizes as
“an element in the description of the fundamental experiential feeling, but
delusive as a metaphysical starting-point” (PR 160).
Novelty, ritual, aNd redemptioN 31
Another side effect of this physiological indulgence is the lapse in
awareness and subsequently corrupted prehension of the actual occasion.
Whitehead refers to this as “the chequered history of our own capacity
for knowledge” (PR 161). Hence, the appraisal and deconstruction of the
aesthetic is not authentically of the given emergence, but of a scattered
series of occasions strung together with presumptions and justifications.
This may account for Rilke’s statement, that such attempts of criticism
“always come down to more or less happy misunderstandings” (17), an
extreme statement that may be qualified with copious exceptions, but
nonetheless pointing to the dissonance between emergence and judgment.
At a higher, subtler level of premature objectification, there is an
ironic conditioning to canalized appraisal, the “conformal feelings” (PR
164) that greet over-saturated salience—i.e., clichés. Emergence that once
spurned a galvanizing objectification and conjured sweeping eternal
objects may eventually greet reduced effectiveness when over-exposed;
consequently, further display of the same emergence causes the subject
to greet it with a callous indifference. What once was conceptual is now
conformal.
In its satisfaction, one could apply Whitehead’s “two dimensional”
characteristic to aesthetic emergence (PR 166). First, narrowness and its as-
sociated intensity of the emergence draw depth from the initial novelty of
the prehension. But as the continued exposure wears the subject’s interest,
the width takes in the recontextualization of evolving standards and new
emergence, so the comparison stretches the application, but reduces the
intensity.
Clearly, this application applies not only to aesthetics, but also to our
everyday, instinctive decisions. We recognize and react to our prehensions
with biases and conditioning from objectifications that never had suffi-
cient exposure to the initial datum to make a legitimate decision. This is
an inevitable byproduct of the subjectivist principle, even in Whitehead’s
revised state. Nonetheless, knowledge of this process gives us a tool with
which to hone our awareness, the elusive unconscious gradually surfacing
as conscious and within our control.
IV. Aesthetic Evolution from Private Resonance to Communal Ritual
The power of poetic insight hits us most sharply when it conforms
to our own, private propositions. Our subjective resonance finds comfort
and fortitude in recognition of an expressed proposition of another pre-
hending subject, for it insists that we are linked by these loves and pains
that anchor meaning to our lives. As Hosinski so eloquently observes,
32 Jeremy richard hoffart
“Something similar occurs unconsciously throughout the universe, and
is the way in which new truth is born” (109). To arrive at this universal
resonance, however, we must move beyond the subjective sphere of pre-
hension, moving into Whitehead’s general theory of theology, as outlined
in Religion in the Making, which implies that the origin of rituals,
community, and emotion feed into the very purpose of art. In final evalu-
ation, however, we must also address the same danger of an over-zealous
religion, in that the “dogma” of art must never petrify novelty.
For Whitehead, ritual begins with an individual experience. Before
any expression or structure can occur, there must be a generated insight
in the private, subjective prehension of the world. This brand of solitude
often leads to a ravenous inquiry, immersed in mystic lure, stumbling
after the origin and meaning amid the myriad flourishes in presentational
immediacy. This experience speaks first in feeling, a vector toward sig-
nificance, weighted with the subjective emotion inherited from the senses.
Soon, the subject seeks expression. To transcend the potential barrenness
of actualities, to discover a social intimacy in shared experience, and to
follow the lure of God’s conceptual prehensions, the individual turns her
private prehensions inside out, expressing her feelings through even the
crudest beginnings of what we term “art.”
That is, not all aesthetic expression presents itself in the hallowed
form of tradition or the amplified voice of display. Those extensions may
come later, but the first reflection of reverence flashes in the moments
of a brief exchange or hushed observation. In the necessity of language,
we all communicate through symbols; we are saturated in our thirst for
meaning. A handshake, billboard, or a traffic signal have long fallen under
assumption for their indication, yet they testify—remedially, at least—of the
anthropological evolution of our culture found in symbolic reference. So
prevalent is this symbolic and potentially artistic coloring to presentational
immediacy, we often take it for granted; so rather than question, advance,
and revere our aesthetic nature, we trudge along, head down, world muted,
meaning astray.
Nevertheless, the world has not witnessed a single civilization that has
failed to find the ritual of art. Once individuals discover expression, they
form synchronous vectors toward a common end—they form a community.
This is Whitehead’s second step for an evolving religion, as it exemplifies
a nexus of higher-ordered unities searching for the source of their shared
characteristics. Religion also infuses dissonant qualities within the nexus
with a common volition, and perhaps more importantly, it answers the
problem of perishing with a resonance of the eternal. At this point, art
and worship blur their distinctions, and aesthetic lure appears as the voice
of an untapped divinity.
Novelty, ritual, aNd redemptioN 33
Naturally, once Whitehead has exhausted nearly every logical abstrac-
tion, he defines God’s presence in terms of artwork. In Process and Reality,
he speaks of “Michelangelo’s masterpieces of statuary” as if he were address-
ing the signature of God: “it implants timelessness on what is passing,”
he says; “it becomes the ‘moving image of eternity’” (338). Moreover, the
reverence of art does more than redeem the “evil” of perishing; it infuses it
with purpose. Time flows out of necessity, emerges out of novelty, evolves
out of an unquenchable desire for self-actualization, from the fleeting
vision of a single artist to the communal celebration of a cultured society.
The perishing that Whitehead speaks of is only evil in part, in that the
receding tide pulls away every temporal actuality defining our experience.
But just as being perishes, it fuels a perennial birth, cleanses regret with a
resurrected opportunity, a promise that “this too shall pass.”
The mutually illuminated flux of art testifies to God’s concep-
tual prehension—immanent in inspiration—and his consequent nature,
reflected in our aesthetic ritual. Of this sacred interplay, David Gates says,
“[It] is the spirit plunked down in the material world—a brief sample of
the eternal popped into the mechanical drum track of time” (93). We find
in this “drum track” a postmodern aesthetic, one that churns within the
sprawl of media and deconstruction, and so it necessarily demands the
novelty of recontextualization.
So understood, the postmodern aesthetic seems manifest in three
levels of novelty. First, there is the pulp quality of conformal aesthet-
ics, which gleans its expression from hackneyed conventions, caught up
in the momentum of canalized order. Yet “order is not sufficient,” says
Whitehead. “What is required . . . is order entering upon novelty . . . so
that the massiveness of order does not degenerate into mere repetition”
(PR 339). Indeed, if novelty redeems meaning, then repetition echoes
absurdity. Sisyphus will fill no void, will carry no redemption, if he is to
simply roll the aesthetic boulder across our collective palates ad infinitum.
“Life,” Whitehead reminds us, “refuses to be embalmed alive” (PR 339).
To counter this repetition, the next level of aesthetic emergence is
also partly conformal, yet with a patterned limitation of the subject’s novel
actualities thrown into the formula. Rather than the pre-chewed proposi-
tions of base conformity, patterned aesthetic actualities borrow the shape
of established concrescence and fill in the concrete emergence with novel
content. This is the nature of most popular art. Like the canon of a fun-
damental religion, a patterned aesthetic actuality is pleasing for its ritual
and tradition. Though these patterns can be as diluting and stale as an
inflexible dogma, to a point, art has great success in this realm, and at its
best may present a postmodern context of a common symbolic reference,
reaching closer to the third and final expression of aesthetics.
34 Jeremy richard hoffart
While Ecclesiastes insisted there is “nothing new under the sun” (to
lower ourselves to conformal aesthetics), the hybrid aesthetic of past actu-
alities and novel form has continually emerged to redefine our perspectives
of meaning, beauty, and ritual. In that, however, we do not find profun-
dity in completely eschewing conformity, and indeed we cannot escape
the ontological demand of basing new expression on past concrescence.
To attempt at such leads to selfishly safeguarded prehensions wrapped in a
private emotion. But an art that is so self-involved that it absorbs no light is
a refusal of its own ritual; the most satisfying novelty recontextualizes the
past rather than escapes from it—e.g., Fowles casting a postmodern view of
the Victorian era in tandem with the 1960’s. At its highest expression, art
risks endowing the profane with a sacred banner, sweeps up the mundane
with a divine glimmer. It eschews the pattern of the obvious. It reveres
the astonishment of novelty. It raises a channeling rod to the primordial
lure of God’s ideal, manifesting the nontemporal in distorted portions of
humanity—a breath of worship, a brush whispering across a canvas, a ritual
crackling with the energy of the eternal.
V. Aesthetic Redemption
Aesthetic redemption is the prime exemplification of that hybrid
feeling we term “bittersweet,” an irony of loss and reassurance. This expe-
rience reflects a vivid illustration of Whitehead’s philosophy of God. As
Whitehead speaks of “the tender elements of the world, which slowly and
in quietness operate by love” (PR 342–43), compare this to Wordsworth’s
“wise passivity,” to Rumi’s “community of spirit,” to Mozart’s very compo-
sitions, the Amadeus transcending expectations, whose divine aesthetic
insight prompted Peter Shaffer to venture, “I bet you that’s how God hears
the world” (57).
Suffering, in contrast, makes God seem deaf to our pleas. Angst is
deconstructive, sprawling, without reason. But the real tragedy of angst,
wallowing over its loss, “the present under abstraction,” is that we are re-
sponsible for its cause (PR 340). Through God’s primordial valuation, we
have been offered potentialities. Through our choice, we have perpetually
accepted or rejected those potentialities, judging our valuations based on
a human—and therefore, flawed—appetition. Not all of our appetitions
are corrupt or impulsive, but distinguishing between these misjudged po-
tentialities and the pure lure of divine guidance requires that lifetimes,
histories, and extinctions of eras wash away the culmination of our limited
ambitions. Our only redemption of these cycles appears in the promise of
Novelty, ritual, aNd redemptioN 35
something more eternal, ultimately reconciling “the limitations of finitude
inherent in temporal actuality” (Hosinski 215).
As Whitehead says, “these are the human terms in which we can
glimpse the origin of the drive toward the limited ideals of perfection
which haunts the Universe” (PR 265). On a more immediate level, these are
also the terms which define aesthetic parameters. To the dipolar balance
between good and evil, joy and sorrow, permanence and flux, we can add
the distinctions of form and content. In every art, we witness a contrast of
these distinctions, and subsequently, we find an inexhaustible template for
novelty. The poet, the musician, the painter, the dancer—all seize from the
fluency of life a certain pattern and order, perhaps recording that pattern
and rendering it permanent, static, and eternal, but ultimately redeeming
the original insight by recreating the art with a heightened order, an impro-
vised embodiment of God’s “primordial appetition” (PR 347).
“The world is felt in a unison of immediacy,” says Whitehead. He
may as well be giving witness to one of Rumi’s poems or Mozart’s sympho-
nies. One will hardly find an artist who lacks a certain mysticism, even
if it surfaces as a secular reverence for the wonder of creation. Even Ayn
Rand, a novelist adamant in her atheism, endows her characters with a
nearly transcendent intuition. No matter how empirical or disillusioned
we are, we cannot ignore the need for redemption, and in addressing this
need, artists especially seem to buckle under the humility of their own
limitations.
The cycle of flux, the patterned flashpoints of recognition, consis-
tency, and order among chaos, cradles the sprawling pressure of angst with
a glimpse of the eternal. Such an inherent dynamism is what offers the
endless wellspring of artistic inspiration—a nudge of insight that often
transcends the artists it flows through. No wonder Whitehead describes
God as “the poet of the world, with tender patience leading it by his vision
of truth beauty, and goodness” (PR 346). In this sense, God’s consequent
nature makes him not only a fellow sufferer of our angst, but a sounding
board for our aesthetic reverence, which is nothing less than a resurrected
faith.
Works Cited
Gates, David. “Will We Ever Get Over Irony?” Newsweek, Jan. 2000, pp.
93.
Hosinski, Thomas. Stubborn Fact and Creative Advance: An Introduction
to the Metaphysics of Alfred North Whitehead. Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers, 1993.
Johnstone, Keith. Impro: Improvisation and the Theatre. Methuen Drama,
1989.
Kenyon, Jane. Constance. Graywolf, 1993.
Rilke, Rainer Maria. Letters to a Young Poet. Translated by M.D. Herter
Norton, Norton & Co., 1934.
Shaffer, Peter. Amadeus. Harper Collins, 1980.
Whitehead, Alfred North. Adventures of Ideas. 1933. The Free Press, 1967.
———. Process and Reality: The Corrected Edition. Edited by David Ray Griffin
and Donald W. Sherburne, 1929. The Free Press, 1978.
———. Religion in the Making. 1926. New American Library, 1974