Aporia Vol. 9, 1999
The Possibility of the Existence of an
Actual Infinite
Shane Hopkins
In a work entitled The Mormon Concept of God, evangelical Christians
Francis Beckwith and Stephen Parrish criticize the Latter-day Saint
(hereafter LDS) concept of God. Their philosophical arguments that
the LDS concept of God contains philosophical flaws are based mainly
on Mormon eternalism—the idea that individuals, matter, space, and
time have always existed. Their central criticism stems from an argument
by William Lane Craig that it is impossible for an actual infinite number
of things to exist in the real world. 1 intend to show that the argument
from the impossibility of an actual infinite is fallacious, and that
Beckwith and Parrish neither understand the nature of LDS doctrine
nor argue effectively that it is incoherent.
First, 1 will assess the philosophical arguments surrounding the
actual infinite. TTien, 1 will discuss several scientific arguments that are
relevant to the discussion of whether time could have begun. Finally, 1
will conclude that Beckwith and Parrish's work is ineffective in dis
crediting the LDS understanding of God.
There are numerous statements by LDS leaders that support the
claim that an actual infinite is included in the LDS view. To support this
view, Beckwith and Parrish cite Joseph Fielding Smith, Heber C.
Kimball, and Bruce R. McConkie—each a general authority in the LDS
church (54). For example, Heber C. Kimball explains that "we shall go
back to our Father and God, who is connected with one who is still far
ther back; and this Father is connected with one still further back, and
Shane is a senior studying phibsophy at Brigham Young University. He will
graduate with honors this April and thereafter plans to go to medical school.
70 SHANE HOPKINS
SO on" (19). It is hard to imagine that any consistent LDS view could
avoid referring to an actual infinite.
The Existence of an Actual Infinite
In Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang Cosmology, William Lane Craig
and Quentin Smith debate whether there was a beginning of time and
whether God caused it. Craig's argument that the universe had a begin
ning centers on the impossibility of an actual infinite (4). He claims
that since an actual infinite is impossible, the universe must have begun
to exist. Beckwith and Parrish rely mainly on Craig's arguments to sup
port their objections to LDS etemalism. They also attack other
instances of an actual infinite that they claim are part of the LDS view.
Craig offers four arguments against the possibility of an actual
infinite, two philosophical and two scientific. The philosophical argu
ments attempt to refute the idea of an actual infinite by reducing the
idea to an absurdity. I challenge Craig's reductio refutation on two
grounds: first, Craig shows that, at best, an actual infinite is counter
intuitive, not that it is impossible; second, the counter-intuitive
inferences that Craig draws from the idea of an actual infinite are a
result of his faulty conceptualization of it.
"Infinity" can mean a variety of things. A "potential infinite"
refers to a magnitude that can be indefinitely divided or extended. This
is the infinity of Zeno's paradoxes and is also called a "variable finite" by
Cantor. An "actual infinite" represents the number of all the numbers in
{I, 2, 3, . . .}. It is not becoming infinite; it is a complete, deterministic
whole.
Craig begins by emphatically asserting that the existence of an
actual infinite cannot be inferred from the well-defined mathematical
concept alone. Craig says Cantor "won for the actual infinite the status
of legitimacy that it holds today" (6). However, after acknowledging
that the mathematical concept of an actual infinite is a generally
accepted idea, Craig is quick to point out that it does not necessarily fol
low that it ontologically exists. Indeed, even the mathematical integrity
of an actual infinite has been doubted, which makes its ontological
instantiation even more unlikely.
Craig's argument does not assert that the existence of an actual
infinite is impossible, only that its possibility cannot be directly inferred
THE POSSIBILITY OF THE EXISTENCE OF AN ACTUAL INFINITE 71
from the coherence of the mathematical concept alone. For this reason,
I only consider his argument that the assumption of an actual infinite
produces absurdities to be significant in drawing the conclusion that an
actual infinite cannot exist in the real world. Craig's first argument may
be summarized as follows:
1. An actual infinite cannot exist.
2. An infinite temporal regress of events is an actual infinite.
3. Therefore an infinite temporal regress of events cannot exist.
Both Aristotle and Aquinas have disputed premise two, claiming
that beginningless time is actually infinite (Craig 25). They held that
the past was only potentially infinite since only the present moment
actually exists. Craig, however, feels this analysis is inadequate: "the fact
remains that since past events, as determinate parts of reality, are definite
and distinct and can be numbered, they can be conceptually collected
into a totality" (25). For this reason, Craig concludes that a beginning-
less past necessarily entails the existence of an actual infinite.
If the conditions just quoted are all that is required to constitute
an actual infinite, the future must either be an actual infinite or must
come to an eventual end. Craig contends that the future differs from the
past because it is not actual, while the past is already realized. However,
it seems that Beckwith and Parrish cannot consistently maintain this
position, for they hold that God is both timeless and omniscient. As
such, the future is already actual to God and thus certainly can be con
ceptually collected into a totality. Therefore, Beckwith and Parrish must
either allow for the existence of an actual infinite number of future
events, or accept that time will end at some point.
Perhaps Beckwith and Parrish would be willing to concede that
time will end. In that case, they may successfully avoid this problem and
consistently maintain their position that an actual infinite is impossible.
However, it makes humanity's future look pretty bleak (since no individ
ual can ever be permanent or immortal), unless a person can somehow
be removed from time. Regardless, there are other reasons for believing
that Craig's argument against the actual infinite is inadequate.
Craig supports premise one of the above argument by saying:
"While the actual infinite may be a fruitful and consistent concept in
the mathematical realm, it cannot be translated from the mathematical
72 SHANE HOPKINS
world into the real world, for this would involve counter-intuitive
absurdities" (9). The rest of this section will discuss this claim.
Craig demonstrates absurdities that arise by attempting to per
form arithmetic operations on an actual infinite. For example, Craig
proposes a library with an infinite collection of books as an example of
an actual infinite in the real world. The collection becomes no larger
in number after adding another infinite collection of books. No matter
what happens at the circulation desk, no matter how many books are
checked in or out, the library will almost always keep an infinite
number of books on its shelves. The only exception is when certain
infinite combinations of books are checked out—but even checking out
an infinite number of books could leave the library full or empty
depending on the circumstances. Adding a new book to the library
causes other problems. Every natural number has already been used to
identify an already included volume, so there is none left for additional
books! After citing dozens of similar examples, Craig draws the conclu
sion that these absurdities sufficiently support his claim that an actual
infinite is impossible.
Craig also mentions Hilbert's Hotel, a notable illustration of an
instantiated infinite by David Hilbert (13). In this example, there are
an infinite number of hotel rooms rather than infinite books in a library,
but the absurdities drawn are all analogous. Imagine that every room in
the hotel is occupied. Surprisingly, moving every current guest down the
hall a room or two can always accommodate more guests. There will
always be enough rooms for the current guests and an infinite number of
new ones as well.
Virtually every example Craig and Hilbert offer can be simplified
to just one central absurdity: the number of objects in an actual infinite
never changes no matter what kind of finite mathematical operation is
performed on it. In these simplified terms, their examples offer no more
absurdity than that which follows from the mathematical definition of
infinity itself. Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatic set theory defines an infinite
set as one that is equinumerous with some of its proper subsets (Craig 8).
Indeed, the definition itself seems counter-intuitive.
A proper subset is a subset that does not have every member of the
original set. For example, the set {2, 4, 6,. . .} is a proper subset of {1, 2,
3,...} because the second set includes members not in the first. The odd
thing is that every member of the first is in the second, and yet they have
THE POSSIBILITY OF THE EXISTENCE OF AN ACTUAL INFINITE 73
the same number of members! This is strangely contrary to Euclid's
maxim that the whole is greater than the parts. We know these two sets
must have the same number of members because the Principle of
Correspondence states that if the members of the two sets can be drawn
into a one-to-one correspondence then they are equinumerous. Craig
eventually clarifies that his absurdities all relate to the Principle of
Correspondence, which is indispensable in the definition of infinity (24).
There is certainly something strange about a set that can have
proper subsets equinumerous with itself, but this strangeness is straight
forward in the definition of infinity. If Craig's collection of books were
divided in half by removing every second book, and afterward it con
tained fewer books than it did before, that would be an absurd result
according to set theory. Then we would have to say that the set must not
have been infinite at all. If it were infinite, by definition it would have
to have still been equinumerous with the proper subset formed by
removing every second book.
John Mackie has argued that an actual infinite's strange properties
fail to make it unbelievable (Craig 98). For example, the impossibility
of accommodating a new book with its own unique natural number is
not absurd. Whether a new book can be numbered with a natural number
is irrelevant since it can always be distinguished in some other way,
labeled and included in the collection. There are infinitely many real
numbers available to accommodate any new book at any sequential
position in the collection.
Other absurdities cited by Craig stem directly from the counter-
intuitiveness of reversing Euclid's maxim. In an actual infinite, the
whole is actually not greater than a part. It is a surprising result that an
infinite number of books behaves so strangely, but in principle it is not
necessarily an impossible result. In general, humans have neither
experience nor intuition regarding the infinite. Without experience to
verify what is or is not possible (or what is "absurd") when dealing with
infinity, Craig's examples may only verify that examples of an actual infi
nite in daily life are just as counter-intuitive as the mathematical infinite.
Although creating an infinite collection of books is impossible, pre
dictable results (although strange) following from the assumption that
one exists do not demonstrate impossibility.
Beckwith and Farrish anticipate the argument that an actual infinite
is not absurd because its properties are clearly expected from its definition.
74 SHANE HOPKINS
However, in their rebuttal they commit a straw man fallacy. They compare
the defensive claim that the actual infinite's strange properties are not
absurd to an apologetic for square circles (67). Square-circle apologists
say that a thing that is internally contradictory by definition cannot be
faulted for not being internally consistent. They offer no compelling
reason that we should accept the validity of square circles while expecting
us to disregard our basic intuitions about reality. However, although
Beckwith and Parrish fail to acknowledge them, there may be especially
compelling reasons in LDS theology to grant that an actual infinite is
possible.
In philosophy, accepting an unlikely proposition without evidence
is usually not allowed. However, in religion, faith allows for and neces
sitates acceptance of incompletely supported propositions. If an actual
infinite is truly implied by LDS doctrine and if the actual infinite obeys
a different set of counter-intuitive rules than finite sets, accommodations
in the LDS world view can be justifiably made. Further, the inadequacy
of limiting all existing entities (including time and space) to a finite
magnitude seems greater than the stretch of intuition required to allow
for an actual infinite.
I have shown that it is not clear whether an actual infinite is
absurd. Regardless, absurdity is not sufficient for impossibility. Craig's
examples only verify that counter-intuitive results are achieved from
arithmetic manipulations. This point is anticipated by the definition
of infinity, and should be expected since infinity is not an intuitive
concept in general. For these reasons, Craig's first argument fails to
prove the impossibility of either an actual infinite or beginningless
time.
Craig's second philosophical argument is that an actual infinite
can never be formed by successive addition. However, Smith answers
this thus; "although [an infinite series] can never be completely synthesized
in a finite time, it can be completely synthesized in an infinite time"
(Craig 89). It appears that Smith is willing to concede that successive
addition can never form an actual infinite if the process has a beginning
or if time is finite. Only in the case of infinite time is an actual infinite
possible from successive addition. Craig contends that Smith begs the
question in his reply by assuming infinite time. However, Smith's argu
ment only shows that the concept of an actual infinite is self-consistent.
Craig can be just as readily accused of question begging by requiring an
The possibility of the existence of an actual infinite 75
initial assumption of finite time in his argument about successive
addition.
As previously shown, many absurdities suggested by Craig stem
from the faulty manner in which the infinite is understood or described
(for example, conceptually imagining a beginning to infinite successive
addition). These absurdities do not reflect as much on the possibility of
an actual infinite as they emphasize errors in the way in which it is con
ceptualized. They tell us what can and cannot be done with an actual
infinite, and they prompt us to make distinctions in our conceptual
understanding. There are other examples of this as well. For instance,
Craig imagines a finite person removing every second book in an infinite
library by a successive process. Such a task is impossible if one concedes
that successive addition to an already begun process is impossible.
Absurdities derived from some concept involving an actual infinite may
show the concept itself to be problematic without telling us anything
about the possibility of an actual infinite. An infinite library and an
infinite hotel are impossible from the outset, but not because they are
infinite. They are impossible because they must have always existed to
exist at all, and because infinite successive changes in them (like shift
ing rooms or checking out infinite amount of books) are impossible.
Other objections to an actual infinite refer to an infinite value. It is
a mistake to conceive of infinity as a number because this definition
invites one to project unfounded numeric qualities onto it without even
realizing it. Every specific number is finite, and when infinity is called a
number merely because it defines a mathematical relationship, the issue
becomes ambiguous. This fact is important because it clarifies arguments
involving reference to the "infinitieth" member of an infinite set( Mackie
93). There is no such member, and absurdities stemming from it are
nonsense.
There are no past moments infinitely distant, and a traversal of the
infinite must never have begun, but always have been. Projecting finite
conceptions on infinity (like a furthest point or a beginning of traversal)
is likely to produce absurdities. However, such absurdities say nothing
about the infinite itself, merely the misconception with which it may be
held.
To review, the absurdities Craig draws from the concept of an
actual infinite are merely counter-intuitive results, not impossibilities
or self-contradictions. Furthermore, all genuine problems in the concept
76 SHANE HOPKINS
of a real actual infinite can be understood as errors in mixing up infinite
and finite processes, operations, attributes, etc. Craig has yet to show
that any impossibility is entailed in a correctly characterized infinite.
Therefore, whether an actual infinite is possible remains an open question.
Craig does offer scientific evidence that the universe must have
begun, but the theories he cites to defend this thesis are based on scien
tific methods and theories, with all the accompanying limitations. 1 will
now discuss Big Bang Cosmology in order to refute Craig's latter argu
ments. Without compelling scientific support, both Craig's scientific
and philosophical arguments for time's beginning are inconclusive.
The Problem of Science and Religion
Beckwith and Parrish cite Craig's scientific arguments to support
their claim that an actual infinite is impossible and that the LDS con
cept of God is incoherent. However, it is a mistake to use science in a
discussion of religious coherency since science never makes necessary
claims about truth, and can therefore never definitively show the impos
sibility of a particular point of view. Despite this fact, science would still
have evidential value to the current discussion if it were not the case
that LDS cosmology seems to deny its fundamental assumptions. Many
inconsistent results can be derived by combining two systems with con
flicting assumptions. Big Bang Cosmology offers a perfect example of
why a discussion involving both science and religion can easily suffer
from fallacious reasoning.
The Big Bang Theory is the most widely recognized scientific
explanation of the origin of the universe. Tracing time backwards, all
matter in the universe converges on one point. This point is a singularity
with neither spatial nor temporal extension. According to the Big Bang
Theory, it was from this point that everything in our universe originated.
This theory relies on at least two very important assumptions. First
of all, it assumes that there must be uniformity tbroughout time and
space except in rare, temporary instances. This means that the physical
laws science observes are true everywhere and at all times. This assump
tion is consistent with experience accumulated during mankind's short
history, but more importantly, this assumption is justified because theories
based on it have been successful in making accurate predictions about
the universe.
THE POSSIBILITY OF THE EXISTENCE OF AN ACTUAL INFINITE 77
The second fundamental assumption science makes is that the
universe behaves naturalistically. That is, all phenomena can be explained
in terms of natural laws and causes without referring to a supernatural
agent. It can be understood as minimally allowing for a mechanistic,
determinate understanding of the universe independent of whether God
is the one who created it.
Without the assumptions of uniformity and naturalism, it is difficult
to imagine how scientific theories could be formulated and what purpose
they could serve. The ultimate statement that these assumptions make
about the universe is that it is ordered and predictable (within a certain
scope). Although scientific theories may not be able to predict all
experimental outcomes, their capability and limits are understood in
most cases. When theories are unable to make definitive predictions,
they often establish probabilities that have just as much value.' Without
being able to rely on the continuation and integrity of natural laws,
society could not function the way it does. Therefore, for the purposes
of science, the assumptions of naturalism and uniformity are not only
convenient but also necessary, regardless of whether they are ultimately
true.
The Big Bang Theory makes verifiable predictions and explains
otherwise puzzling data. For example, the red shift of light from other
galaxies, background microwaves bathing the universe, and increasing
entropy are all explained by the Big Bang Theory. Few other current
theories explain such a large amount of data. However, the Big Bang
Theory has severe limitations as well.
In 1970, Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose, two prominent
theoretical physicists, demonstrated that a space-time singularity was
necessarily included in the Big Bang Theory (66). A singularity is an
infinitely small point with a very large mass—in this case, the mass of
the entire universe. The density at this point is infinite because the
dimensions are infinitely small. Although mathematics has shown that
space-time singularities are unavoidable if we accept Einstein's theory of
relativity, science cannot determine the properties of such a singularity.
'The Heisenberg uncertainty principle guarantees that not all experi
mental outcomes are predictable. However,q uantum mechanics uses probabilities
to make predictions where absolute calculations are impossible (Hawking 81).
78 SHANE HOPKINS
General relativity and all other physical laws fail to hold at the space-
time singularity (Hawking 157).
Some assume that this means physical events and time are possible
before the Big Bang—we would just be unable to determine what the
universe would be like before the singularity, and anything in the for
mer universe would be irrelevant to us. However, this is not the case.
Quentin Smith summarizes why the definition of a singularity precludes
this possibility.
Furthermore, it belongs analytically to the concept of the cosmo-
logical singularity that it is not the effect of prior physical events.
The definition of a singularity that is employed in the singularity
theorems entails that it is impossible to extend the space-time
manifold beyond the singularity. The definition in question is
based on the concept of inextendible curves ... if there is some
point p beyond which it is possible to extend the space-time manifold
beyond which geodesies or time-like curves can be extended, then
p by definition is not a singularity. (Craig 120)
In other words, it is built into the mathematics that the singularity is an
absolute beginning of time, not just an unpredictable anomaly in our
naturalistic universe. With no prior events leading to it, this singu
larity seems to have been either caused by a timeless God, or not
caused by anything. Either way, it did not have a cause in conven
tional time.
If the universe was uncaused then it must be self-existent or have
spontaneously come into being from nothing. The latter option, accord
ing to Craig, runs contrary to "the strongest support experience affords"
(121). Granting this, we must admit that many things about the Big
Bang run contrary to experience (no prior time, infinite density, break
down of all natural laws)! Paul Draper contends that any criticism of
the idea of uncaused creation stems from acceptance of the metaphysical
intuition, "something can't come from nothing" (47). Draper notes
that metaphysical intuitions are notorious for being false. However, if
something can come from nothing, it seems that the universe must nec
essarily be a very arbitrary place indeed. To be consistent with science's
assumption of naturalism, we must assume that there are non-arbitrary
reasons why the universe came to be. Therefore, the proposition that
THE POSSIBILITY OF THE EXISTENCE OF AN ACTUAL INFINITE 79
the universe began uncaused seems inadequate for science as well as
religion.
Craig quotes Fred Hoyle, a contemporary scientist: "Hoyle realizes
that an absolute beginning of the universe points beyond the universe
to a reality more ultimate than itself, since to say it simply sprang into
being for no reason out of nothing is 'unsatisfactory'" (45-46). It is
unsatisfactory because it denies the assumption of naturalism. Craig
draws from this some support for the notion that God must have created
the Big Bang. He criticizes Hoyle for his fruitless pursuit of a "steady
state" theorem against all odds and even after most scientists had
already given up. Indeed, Craig claims that Hoyle's work was motivated
by a desire to avoid the theistic implications of a reality more ultimate
than the universe.
Actually, such implications may be avoided without contradicting
the assumption of naturalism. There is a version of the Big Bang Theory
that includes the idea that the universe is self-existent. Stephen
Hawking, who first influenced the scientific community to accept space-time
singularities, afterward decided that he did not believe that singularities
were real. He believes that space-time is finite, yet has no boundary or
edge. Rather, its curvature becomes greater and greater until, in effect,
it folds back on itself. If one were to travel in one direction toward the
edge of the observable universe, one would eventually arrive back at one's
starting place. TTiis sounds ridiculous, yet has surprising support:
Thus the no boundary proposal is a good scientific theory in the
sense of Karl Popper: it could have been falsified by observations
but instead its predictions have been confirmed. . .. All the com
plicated structutes that we see in the universe might be explained
by the no boundary condition for the universe together with the
uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics.( 180)
Hawking does not feel that this entails the existence of God. In the case
of the no boundary proposal, the universe is both finite and boundless.
Its existence is in need of no further explanation—it just is.
However, there is a much simpler and more intuitive method of
understanding these issues. It is easy to forget that the assumptions of uni
formity and naturalism, on which we base so much of our thinking, are
only assumptions. LDS scripture actually seems to contradict or at least
80 SHANE HOPKINS
qualify them. In LDS theology there are references to different "orders"
of time,^ ultimate laws outside the scope of science,^ and spiritual
influences unexplained by science"*—each of which is an exception to
naturalism. Religious people already accept a spiritual reality more
fundamental than that suggested by naturalism. It should not be too
much of a stretch to understand that man's theories—both scientific
and religious—are not infallible for this reason.
Theories about the origin of the universe are ultimately weak.
"Unless and until we achieve an understanding of the Planck epoch [the
period prior to 10'"^^ seconds after the big bang], it is hardly more than sci
entific bravado even to speculate about the origin of the universe. It may
well be that this question is beyond science. Still, we cannot resist"
(Hawley 459-60). The limitation of science results because the assump
tion of uniformity becomes increasingly less likely as time approaches
the Big Bang.
If scientists are compelled to admit that uniformity may break
down at certain points in the past, scientific theories must then be lim
ited to a particular scope of time. For this reason, no scientific evidence is
ultimately compelling in denying the existence of infinite time. Because
in an LDS view any apparent properties of our temporal universe may
merely be part of a mortal "sphere" of existence (D&.C 93:30), 1 have
now shown that there are both scientific and religious reasons for dis
regarding Craig's scientific arguments.
To conclude, Beckwith and Parrish fail to show in The Mormon
Concept of God: A Philosophical Analysis that the LDS view is internally
incoherent. Although they do show contemporary notions of the actual
infinite to be counter-intuitive, they do not demonstrate the existence
of an actual infinite to be impossible. The LDS world view is capable of
Tor example, Abraham was shown relative orders of planets and time
(Abraham 3; 3, 4, 9). Joseph Smith has also observed that past, present and
future are all "one etemal 'now'" to God (220).
'Considering the LDS view that God became God (Smith 345), he must
have done so by obeying moral laws prior to himself.
"•The description of the "light of Christ" in D&.C 88: 7-13 refers to a type
of influence on the physical world unacknowledged and unexplained by the
physical sciences.
THE POSSIBILITY OF THE EXISTENCE OE AN ACTUAL INFINITE 81
accommodating counter-intuitive conclusions because of its dynamic
doctrinal structure. Science and philosophy can he interesting in evalu
ating religious positions, hut are subject to the common limitations of all
academic human endeavors—they are limited by a mortal paradigm.
The LDS view of eternalism is internally coherent, although it may not
he readily compatible with traditionally held beliefs and assumptions
about God or the nature and origin of the universe.
82 SHANE HOPKINS
Works Cited
Beckwith, Francis J., and Stephen E. Parrish. The Mormon Concept of
God: A Philosophical Analysis. New York; The Edwin Mellen Press,
1991.
Craig, William Lane, and Quentin Smith. Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang
Cosmology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Hawking, Stephen. The Illustrated A Brief History Of Time. New York:
Bantam Books, 1996.
Hawley, John E, and Katherine A. Holcomb. Foundations of Modem
Cosmology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Kimball, Heber C. "Temple And Endowments—Raising Grain And
Building Storehouses—Dedication." Journal of Discourses 4.19
(1856): 224-27.
Pojman, Louis P. Philosophy of Religion: An Anthology. New York:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1998.
Smith, Joseph, Jr. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Ed. Joseph
Fielding Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Press, 1938.