AporiaVol. 14 number 1—2004
The Role of Happiness in Kant’s Ethics
JULIELUNDHUGHES
ant, in an unusually non-technical way, defines happiness as getting
K
what one wants.1Also unusual in his ethical writings is a lack of dis-
cussion on happiness, since one typically thinks of ethics as being
inextricably linked to happiness. Kant does not discuss happiness much
because happiness is not the basis of his system of ethics, in contrast to
most ethical theories which make happiness the aim of morality. However,
happiness stills has a role to play in his ethics. In this essay I will discuss
how happiness fits into Kant’s ethics. First, I will discuss Kant’s definitions
of happiness. Second, I will explain his reasons for choosing a basis for
morality other than happiness. Finally, I will illuminate the different roles
that happiness plays in Kant’s ethics.
I.
In The Metaphysical Principles of Virtue, Kant describes happiness as
“continuous well-being, enjoyment of life, complete satisfaction with one’s
condition.”2 This description is not so far removed from the utilitarian
definition of happiness—pleasure without pain. Kant expands this idea of
1Kant 240.
2Ibid. 593.
Julie Lund Hughes is a senior majoring in philosophy and English and minoring in ballroom
dance at Brigham Young University. She is moving to New York City this fall, where she will
raise her daughter and pursue a career in editing.
62 JULIELUNDHUGHES
happiness to include “power, riches, honor, even health and that complete
well-being and satisfaction with one’s condition.”3 Kant refers to man’s
preservation and welfare as synonymous with his happiness.4He calls hap-
piness the complete satisfaction of all one’s needs and inclinations.5In the
Critique of Practical Reason, Kant defines happiness as “the state of a
rational being in the world in the whole of whose existence everything goes
according to his wish and will.”6Happiness is not pleasure. It is not the virtu-
ous, joyful feeling associated with living a moral life. Happiness is simply
getting what you want. As Warner A. Wick puts it, happiness “lies in the
fulfillment of whatever [a person’s] many interests happen to be.”7 It is
important to keep Kant’s definition of happiness in mind when reading
his ethics.
II.
Because of the way Kant defines happiness, one can immediately see
some reasons for its powerlessness to function as a basis of morality. First,
getting what one wants might mean preventing others from getting what
they want, so it seems to be difficult, if not impossible, for everyone to be
happy. Thus, if morality is defined in terms of happiness, not everyone can
be moral, which seems wrong. This problem arises whenever one seeks to
define morality in terms of happiness. The fact that not everyone could be
moral if not everyone could be happy follows from the contrapositive of
the conditional statement, “If you are moral, you are happy,” which is what
happiness-based moral systems like Eudaimonismprofess.
There is another problem with basing morality on happiness: it
appears that people do not know for certain what will make them happy.
Kant writes, “The concept of happiness is such an indeterminate concept
3Ibid. 49.
4Ibid. 50.
5Ibid. 59.
6Ibid. 240.
7Wick xxviii.
ROLEOFHAPPINESSINKANT’SETHICS 63
that, although every human being wishes to attain this, he can still never
say determinately and consistently with himself what he really wishes and
wills.”8Kant gives the example of someone who seeks after riches because
he thinks it will make him happy, only to find that his pursuit actually
results in unhappiness, because of the anxiety, envy, and intrigue that come
with it. Another example is someone who seeks after knowledge, only to
discover many dreadful things that had previously been concealed from
him.9As finite beings, we cannot know which actions will result in happi-
ness, for this would require omniscience.10The best one can do is to live by
words of wisdom extracted from one’s experience, such as “frugality, cour-
tesy, reserve and so forth,” in an attempt to be happy.11Kant bluntly states,
“The problem of determining surely and universally which action would
promote the happiness of a rational being is completely insoluble.”12This
is the case because “happiness is not an ideal of reason but of imagina-
tion.”13
This inability to choose actions that will undoubtedly result in hap-
piness leads Kant to the following: “The more a cultivated reason pur-
posely occupies itself with the enjoyment of life and with happiness, so
much the further does one get away from true satisfaction.”14That is, seek-
ing for happiness will not result in finding happiness. For this reason, Kant
says that happiness cannot be the moral purpose of rational beings with
wills.15 If it were, instinct would be more efficient than reason in bringing
happiness about, because we use instinct to fulfill our inclinations.16In this
scenario, reason would have no practical use, but would only be used to
8Kant 70.
9Ibid.
10Ibid. 71.
11Ibid.
12Ibid.
13Ibid.
14Ibid. 51.
15Kant says that happiness is unquestionably a purpose of all rational beings, but it is notthe end of
morality. See Ibid. 68.
16Ibid. 50–51.
64 JULIELUNDHUGHES
contemplate and delight in the happiness that instinct was able to attain.17
However, Kant claims that “the true vocation of reason must be to pro-
duce a will that is good.”18 And producing a good will, in fact, limits the
attainment of happiness in many ways.19
The moral principle of one’s own happiness is false for three more
reasons, according to Kant. First, “experience contradicts the pretense that
well-being always proportions itself to good conduct.”20It is false that doing
the right thing always results in happiness, as the doctrine of happiness
states. In fact, morality often flies in the face of happiness by denying the
attainment of one’s desires. Second, it “contributes nothing at all to the
establishment of morality, since making someone happy is quite different
from making him good.”21Many people fulfill their inclinations (and so are
happy) without being moral. Kant writes, “Every admixture of incentives
taken from one’s own happiness is a hindrance to providing the moral law
with influence on the human heart.”22Thus, seeking happiness often pre-
vents morality. On the other hand, one can be moral without being happy,
since one cannot count on other people to be moral, nor can one count on
nature bringing good fortune. The third and most important reason the
principle of happiness is false is that “it bases morality on incentives that
undermine [morality] and destroy all its sublimity.”23Kant writes that the
principle of happiness tells virtue “to her face that it is not her beauty but
only our advantage that attaches us to her.”24 This, Kant thinks, is clearly
wrong.
These are all legitimate problems with moral theories based on hap-
piness, but the essential problem is even more fundamental. Kant draws
the following distinction between the doctrine of happiness and the doc-
17Ibid. 51.
18Ibid. 52.
19Ibid.
20Ibid. 90.
21Ibid.
22Ibid. 265.
23Ibid. 90.
24Ibid. 91.
ROLEOFHAPPINESSINKANT’SETHICS 65
trine of morals: “In the first of which empirical principles constitute the
whole foundation whereas in the second they do not make even the slight-
est addition to it.”25According to Kant, the principle of happiness is based
on either physical or moral feeling, both of which are empirical principles.26
And “empirical principlesare not at all fit to be the ground of moral laws.”27
This is because morality needs to be universal and necessary (a priori), and
cannot be based on experience (a posteriori).28Kant writes, “If the doctrine
of morals were merely the doctrine of happiness, it would be absurd to
seek a priori principles for it. . . . Only experience can teach what brings us
joy.”29 Kant claims that “all apparently a priori reasoning about [the doc-
trine of happiness] comes down to nothing but experience raised by induc-
tion into generality.”30 This generality is hardly useful because countless
exceptions must be made to account for everyone’s different inclinations.
Plus, according to Kant, mere generality cannot be universal and neces-
sary, as moral laws must be. He writes, “Concepts and judgments concern-
ing ourselves and our actions and omissions have no moral significance at
all if they contain only what can be learned from experience.”31Because the
concept of happiness contains “only what can be learned from experi-
ence,” it must have no moral significance at all. Thus, Kant chooses to
effectively leave happiness out of his moral theory.
Kant believes that autonomy of the will is the sole and supreme prin-
ciple of morality.32Through his analysis, Kant shows that the moral prin-
ciple must be a categorical imperative, which commands “neither more nor
less than just this autonomy.”33Consequently, heteronomy of the will in all
its forms is “the source of all spurious principles of morality.”34Heteronomy
results when a will determines itself by any law other than the categorical
25Ibid. 214.
26Ibid. 90.
27Ibid.
28Ibid. 44–45.
29Ibid. 370–371.
30Ibid. 371.
31Ibid. 370.
32Ibid. 89.
33Ibid.
34Ibid.
66 JULIELUNDHUGHES
imperative, usually by choosing an object, such as happiness, by which to
determine itself.35 This relation of object to will allows only hypothetical
imperatives: “I ought to do something because I will something else.”36
Contrary to this, the categorical imperative states, “I ought to act in such or
such a way even though I have not willed anything else.”37The doctrine of
happiness leads to heteronomy of the will because the will is determined
not by the categorical imperative, but rather by its quest for happiness.
Since the sole principle of morality is autonomy and not heteronomy, hap-
piness cannot be the principle of morality.
III.
We have seen why Kant rejects the doctrine of happiness. But surely
happiness still holds some position in Kant’s ethics—we cannot simply
ignore our desire for happiness. Kant agrees: “To be happy is necessarily
the demand of every rational but finite being.”38Kant reconciles the desire
for happiness with the demands of morality in the following passage:
The human being is not thereby required to renounce his nat-
ural end, happiness, when it is a matter of complying with his
duty; for that he cannot do. . . . Instead, he must abstract alto-
gether from this consideration when the command of duty
arises; he must on no account make it the conditionof his com-
pliance with the law prescribed to him by reason.39
Here Kant explains that one must obey the moral law even when it will not
satisfy one’s inclinations. Sometimes happiness and duty will coincide, but
35Ibid.
36Ibid.
37Ibid.
38Ibid. 159.
39Ibid. 281–282.
ROLEOFHAPPINESSINKANT’SETHICS 67
it is vital to act from duty alone by ignoring the pull of one’s inclinations.
Kant writes, “Pure practical reason does not require that one should
renounce claims to happiness but only that as soon as duty is in question
one should take no account of them.”40For example, it is in the interest of a
shopkeeper to have honest prices to attract customers. But if his reason for
being honest is to increase his happiness, he is not acting from duty, and
so is not acting morally. He must choose to be honest in spite ofhis incli-
nations to be honest, and act solely from duty.41
Although happiness should not be the ultimate aim of rational
beings, it is still a duty, at least in some sense. Kant writes, “To assure one’s
happiness is a duty (at least indirectly); for, want of satisfaction with one’s
condition, under pressure from many anxieties and amid unsatisfied
needs, could easily become a great temptation to transgression of duty.”42
However, the duty of promoting happiness is only one duty among many,
not the ultimate duty, and it can be overridden by other duties. Kant
writes, “Happiness is not the only thing that counts.”43 And Kant is clearly
still rejecting the doctrine of happiness, even when he allows that happi-
ness “can even in certain respects be a duty,”44 because he then writes,
“However, it can never be a direct duty to promote one’s happiness, still
less can it be a principle of all duty.”45
Kant rejects the doctrine of happiness, but he does not deny that
happiness is an end of all rational beings. But what is the point of morality
if it will not make one happy? Kant claims that a moral life will notneces-
sarily result in a happy one. However, he does say that a moral life will
eventually result in a certain satisfactionwith oneself.46Once one achieves
the level of morality wherein one finds joy in obeying the moral law, then
one should cultivate this satisfaction.
40Ibid. 214.
41Ibid. 53.
42Ibid. 54.
43Ibid. 189.
44Ibid. 214.
45Ibid. 215.
46Ibid. 171.
68 JULIELUNDHUGHES
Such satisfaction is similar to a feeling of joy. However, this joy which
is found in virtue is simply a byproduct of doing one’s duty, not the motive.
Kant writes, “When a thoughtful human being has overcome incentives to
vice and is aware of having done his often bitter duty, he finds himselfin a
state that could well be called happiness, a state of contentment and
peace of soul in which virtue is its own reward.”47This happiness is not, as
the eudaimonistclaims, the motive for acting virtuously.48If one only does
one’s duty to receive the reward of peaceful happiness, then one is in real-
ity not acting virtuously. Kant writes, “An action from duty has its moral
worth not in the purposeto be attained by it but in the maxim in accordance
with which it is decided upon.”49
If morality is not about making oneself happy, what is it about? Kant
states, “Morals is not properly the doctrine of how we are to makeourselves
happy, but of how we are to become worthy of happiness.”50 What does
Kant mean by worthy? He says “Someone is worthyof possessing a thing or
a state when it harmonizes with the highest good that he is in possession
of it.”51He explains that “worthiness to be happy is that quality of a person,
based upon the subject’s own will, such that a reason giving universal laws
. . . would harmonize with all the ends of this person.”52Further, “All wor-
thiness depends upon moral conduct.”53
Kant links morality with becoming worthy of happiness in a “frag-
ment of a moral catechism” in the Metaphysics of Morals. In this passage, a
teacher uses the Socratic method to teach his student about being worthy
of happiness. The teacher asks his student what he would do if he were in
charge of all the happiness in the world: keep it or share it?54The student
of course replies that he would share it, but the teacher helps him see that
47Ibid. 510–511, emphasis added.
48Ibid. 511.
49Ibid. 55.
50Ibid. 244.
51Ibid.
52Ibid. 281.
53Ibid. 244.
54Ibid. 594.
ROLEOFHAPPINESSINKANT’SETHICS 69
he would not in fact share it with just anyone. For example, he would not
“see to it that a drunkard is never short on wine,” because the drunkard is
not worthy of happiness.55Our reason instructs us what to do to be worthy
of happiness—by means of the categorical imperative. For example, the cat-
egorical imperative tells us that one should not lie, and that “lying is mean
and makes a human being unworthy of happiness.”56 Kant writes, “A
human being’s observance of his duty is the universal and sole condition
of his worthiness to be happy, and his worthiness to be happy is identical
to his observance of duty.”57 Moral living is worthiness to be happy. But
there is a leap from being worthy of happiness to actually being happy. What
good is it to be worthy of happiness if one is never actually happy? Is there
any sort of cause-and-effect relationship between being worthy for happi-
ness and actually realizing this happiness?
Kant affirms that there is a connection between virtue and happi-
ness, although it is not the connection that the Eudaimonists claim. Kant
writes, “Virtue and happiness together constitute the position of the high-
est good in the person.”58But how is this necessary combination of virtue
and happiness possible? It cannot be, as we have already seen, that the pur-
suit of happiness and the pursuit of virtue are identical.59Kant claims that
happiness and virtue are “two specifically quite different elementsof the high-
est good and that, accordingly, their combination cannot be cognized ana-
lytically.”60Because their combination cannot be cognized analytically, they
must be cognized synthetically.
This leaves two possibilities open: “Either the desire for happiness
must be the motive to maxims of virtue or the maxim of virtue must be the
efficient cause of happiness.”61 The first is impossible, as we have already
seen. It is the Eudaimonist position that Kant previously refuted. The sec-
55Ibid.
56Ibid.
57Ibid. 595.
58Ibid. 229.
59Ibid.
60Ibid. 230.
61Ibid. 231.
70 JULIELUNDHUGHES
ond is also impossible because the causal connection can only be known
through the laws of nature, not the moral laws. Kant writes, “No necessary
connection of happiness with virtue in the world, adequate to the highest
good, can be expected from the most meticulous observance of moral
laws.”62This leaves the puzzling result that the connection between virtue
and happiness cannot be analytic, but it cannot be synthetic either. How,
then, are they possibly connected?
Despite the apparent hopelessness of the situation, Kant resolves this
“antinomy of practical reason.”63 He explains that the concept of cause
depends on time, which we invent. Time does not affect things-in-them-
selves, such as rational agents with wills, nor does cause. Because of this,
virtue and happiness may be connected, but not causally; that is, virtue
does not necessarily cause happiness. However, Kant holds that “a natural
and necessary connection between the consciousness of morality and the
expectation of a happiness proportionate to it as its result can at least be
thought as possible.”64As the student in the earlier passage says:
We see in the works of nature, which we can judge, a wisdom
so widespread and profound that we can explain it to ourselves
only by the inexpressibly great art of a creator of the world.
And with regard to the moral order, which is the highest
adornment of the world, we have reason to expect a no less
wise regime, such that if we do not make ourselves unworthy of
happiness, by violating our duty, we can also hope to share in
happiness.65
Thus, although happiness is not the motivation for virtue, there is indeed
“reason to expect” that virtue will lead to happiness.
62Ibid.
63Ibid.
64Ibid. 235.
65Ibid. 595.
ARTICLETITLE
IV.
Happiness plays a much different role in Kant’s ethics than in
other theories, such as Eudaimonism. Kant explicitly rejects the doctrine of
happiness, which states that one should act virtuously in order to be happy.
Morality is not based on happiness. However, happiness is not completely
left out of the picture. One’s own happiness is a weak sort of duty, which
is an easy one to obey since all men desire happiness. Kant says that moral-
ity is not about becoming happy, but rather about becoming worthy of
happiness by heeding the call of duty. And those who do so can expect,
with some level of certainty, that they will in fact attain happiness.
References
Kant, Immanuel. The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant:
Practical Philosophy. Ed., trans. Mary J. Gregor. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Wick, Warner A. Ethical Philosophy. Introduction (xi–lxii) Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Company, 1994.