SOCRATES AND THE PUBLIC LAWS OF ATHENS
Chris Isaac
In this paper,I will show that there is not an inconsistency between
the Apology and the Crito. I will outline the alleged contradiction, present
some previous answers to the dilemma, and offer my own possible solu
tion to the problem. 1 will show that Socrates acted consistently and that
his behavior can be explained by his vow to obey established laws.
Briefly stated, the alleged contradiction is this: In the Apology,
Socrates tells the jury that he will not obey any verdict acquitting him of
Meletus's charges that carries the condition that he cease philosophizing
in the city {Apology 29d). However,i n the Crito, through the mouth of the
Public Laws of Athens (hereafter PLA), Socrates claims that he cannot
escape because doing so would be breaking the law {Crito 51c). According
to Aristotle, the juries of Athens did not just apply the law to the cases of
certain individuals. Their verdicts had the force of law, or,i n other words,
the judgments of the jury were similar to the passage of a law through the
legislative body (Santas 18). Thus, in the Apology, Socrates is willing to
disobey an order of the court, whereas in the Crito, he argues that it
would be wrong to disobey an order of the court. In order to get clear on
this alleged contradiction, it is necessary to reconstruct the arguments
that Socrates uses to justify his position in both cases.
Socrates begins his argument in the Apology by claiming that one
should do only what is just. It is not right to consider the results of
actions as possible reasons for performing the action. Rather, one must
consider only whether the action is just:
You are wrong, sir, if you think that a man who is any good at all
should take into accoimt the risk of life or death; he should look to
this only in his actions, whether what he does is right or wrong.
{Apology 28b)
Socrates then states that when one has been placed in a position by his
commander, he needs to stay at his "post" regardless of the possible
harmful effects his obedience may bring him. It would not be right, for
example, for Socrates to abandon his watch in a military engagement
{Apology 28d-e). Socrates believes that he has been placed by the god in
the city in order to philosophize. He states several times that he is acting
on the god's behalf and is, in fact, performing a great service for the city.
46 Chris Isaac
The logical conclusion to this argument comes in the hypothetical
court sentence that Socrates considers. If the court were to release him
on the condition he cease his philosophical pursuits, Socrates would have
no choice but to disobey the court. To cease philosophizing would be to
nm away in the face of danger, to disgrace himself by abandoning his
leader, and to base his actions not on just principles of behavior, but on
fear of the possible results of his disobedience.
Socrates strengthens his argument by claiming he would gladly
suffer death many times rather than disobey the god {Apology 30c).
Socrates did not fear death {Apology 41d). Xenophon states explicitly that
Socrates preferred death to life (41). Xenophon also states that Socrates
was much more afraid of becoming a burden to the state, and of no
longer being of service to the god:
Now, if my years are prolonged, I'm sure that I shall have to
pay the penalties of old age: impaired vision and hearing, and
increasing slowness at learning and forgetfulness of what I have
learned. .. . God in his kindness may even have my interests at
heart and be arranging for me to be released from life not only
at exactly the right age, but also the easiest way possible . . .[ and]
also the least trouble to friends.( 42)
Before we move on to the arguments of the Crito, there is one more
point that needs to be made. When Socrates talks of a conditional
release, he is not talking about a release that is subject to his approval.
According to A. D. Woozley, the court is pronormcing a judgment that is
legally binding upon Socrates, regardless of whether he likes or dislikes
the judgment: "In the first case, the discharge is not made, unless and
imtil the conditional offer is accepted; in the second case the discharge is
made, but it holds good for only as long as the man meets the condition"
(303). Socrates offers two arguments in the Crito as to why he should not
defy the will of the Athenians and escape from jad. Santas labels them
"the argument from harm" and "the argument from just agreements"
(Santas 48-49).
Socrates begins the argument from harm by helping Crito recall
certain principles they have held throughout life. Socrates reminds Crito
that they had formally agreed that one should never do wrong willingly.
They also agreed that regardless of what the majority says, wrongdoing
is "in every way harmful and shameful to the wrongdoer" {Crito 49b).
Furthermore, they had both previously agreed that not only should one
not commit a wrong willingly, but one must not do wrong in retaliation
Socrates and Law 47
for wrongdoing {Crito 49c). Socrates ensures that he and Crito agree on
this point as it is essential to the argument that follows.
With these principles in mind, Socrates makes a utilitarian argument.
The PLA question Socrates regarding his motives:
"TeU me, Socrates, what are you intending to do? Do you not by this
action you are attempting intend to destroy us, the laws, and indeed
the whole city, as far as you are concerned? Or do you think it
possible for a city not to be destroyed if the verdicts of its courts
have no force but are nullified and set at naught by private individ
uals?" {Crito 50a-b)
The argument is best explained by Santas: 1. If Socrates were to leave
the jail without the permission of the Athenians he would be nullifying the
court's order. 2. By nullifying the decisions of the court, Socrates is
destroying the laws, as far as it is in his power. 3. If Socrates were to destroy
the laws he would be doing harm to the city. 4. It is wrong to do harm to
anyone. Therefore: 5. Socrates ought not to escape from prison (Santas 15).
It is not necessary that Socrates' actions actually harm the dty. AH that
is required, in the view of the FLA, is that he intend to destroy the law.
Woozley correctly points out that for the argument to be true the PLA
would in fact have to assert that it is wrong for all people to disobey all
laws (317). The principle is very Kantian (Kant 91-92). Socrates seefe to
make himself an exception to the general rule (Woozley 316). Socrates
ought not to disobey the law,e ven if his escape may actually help the city.
The other argument presented in the Crito is the argument from just
agreements. In this argument Socrates does two things. Not ordy does he
present another argument against escaping, but he explicitly sets forth the
relationship he has with the city.
When Socrates came of age in Athens, the dty presented him with a
choice: Either he must obey the laws, or he must leave the dty and seek
residence elsewhere {Crito 51d). If Socrates decided to stay, the laws gave
him two options: Either he must persuade the state of the unjustness of its
laws, or he must obey:" one must obey the commands of one's dty and
coimtry, or persuade it as to the nature of justice" {Crito 51b-c) The laws
daim diat S^rates agreed to this decision willingly. He even had as much
time as he pleased to consider his options {Crito 52e). Socrates' presence in
the city implies that he agreed to abide by the laws, placing him imder the
obligation stated above. He must now either persuade or obey.
According to Richard Kraut, there is some ambiguity as to the
meaning of "persuade." In Kraut's view, Socrates is not claiming that
48 Chris Isaac
the PLA demand blind obedience. All that the FLA demand is that
Socrates "try to obey":
Imagine a government official telling his subordinate, "You must
persuade Mr. Jones to vote for our biU." Nothing in this command
suggests that the subordinate will be blamed for anything less
than success. There is only the smallest of differences between
"you must persuade" and "you must try to persuade." The latter
expresses the speaker's awareness that persuasion is not entirely in
the hearer's power, and it signals a willingness to tolerate honest
failure.( 71-72)
Spiro Panagiotou offers a convincing argument that shows this
interpretation to be incorrect (101). The citizens have agreed to either
persuade or obey. There may be those who have not yet tried to per
suade, and the laws give allowances for those people to do so. The PLA
carmot force obedience and humble submission at the same time. The
laws therefore must have in mind those people, like Socrates, who have
voiced their objections and yet have not convinced the state. "The
reminder 'holding your peace' must therefore be directed to those citi
zens who have already voiced their objections but who have failed to
move the state. It is these citizens who must now obey without demur;
who must obey despite their objections" (Panagiotou 101). Furthermore,
Socrates must convince the PLA that the nature of their command is
imjust and that the law must change. He cannot just "try" to persuade
and then disobey quietly if the state refuses to change. Socrates must
persuade or obey, even if the command given is imjust {Crito 50c).
Socrates also claims that he and the state exist in an unequal rela
tionship and that he agreed to this when he first decided to stay in
Athens. Just as the child is unequal to the parent, the citizens are
unequal to the state. The citizens cannot, once they fail to convince the
state otherwise, randomly disobey its orders (Crito 51e). Like our
parents, the state has brought us up and allowed us to live under its
protection. The state has legally married us and given us the other
advantages of lawful citizenship. Socrates seems to be making a distinc
tion between duty and obligation (Woozley 312-13). It is our duty to
obey the state because of the state's kindness towards us. We owe it
to the state. The laws actually go so far as to claim that failure in this
duty would be an extreme act of impiety (Crito 51c).
In summary, Socrates' relationship with the state is one that he
agreed to take upon himself. He knows he must either persuade the
Socrates and Law 49
laws or obey them. He has given a sub-argument listing duty as one of
the reasons why he must obey their command. Santas shows how
Socrates now directly uses these principles to advance the argument
from just agreements: 1. To abide by the laws of the state is just.
2. Socrates has agreed to abide by the verdicts of the court even if the
verdicts seem unjust. 3. One must do what one agrees to do, provided
it is just {Crito 49e). Therefore: 4. Socrates must abide by the verdicts of
the court. 5. Socrates has been sentenced to death by the jury. 6. If
Socrates were to escape he would not be abiding by the verdict of the
court. Therefore: 7. Socrates must not escape (Santas 21).
It may appear on first reading that premises 2 and 3 contradict
each other. However, a closer reading of the text makes it clear that
this is not the case. Socrates does indeed agree that one must abide by
agreements made provided they are just. "S: When one has come to
an agreement that is just with someone, should one fulfill it or cheat on
it?—C: One should fulfill it" {Crito 49e). But the context of this passage
indicates that the agreement made is an original agreement: namely, to
abide by the verdicts of the court. It is just to abide by all agreements
of the court, whether or not the individual agreements reached are just.
Socrates agrees with Crito that the actual decision of the court is xmjust
to him, but that does not discharge him of the responsibility of abiding
by its verdicts:
S: Shall we say in answer," The city wronged me, and its decision
was not right." Shall we say that, or what—
C: Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, that is our answer.—
S: Then what if the laws said: "Was that the agreement between
us, Socrates, or was it to respect the judgments that the city came
to?" {Crito 50c).
The contradiction between the two dialogues is now generally
clear. In the Apology Socrates has advanced an argument claiming that
one must stay where his commander has placed him. Thus, Socrates
must not obey any decision of the court that he cease philosophizing.
Yet, in the Crito, Socrates has advanced two arguments stating why
he must not disobey the laws of the state. First, he will be a destroyer
of the laws, causing harm to the city. Second, he wiU be breaking a just
agreement made by him with the state. I wiU now present some of the
possible solutions made by Panagiotou and Santas. I will discuss why
these solutions may be faulty and then offer an alternative explanation.
50 Chris Isaac
While discussing these alternative solutions, we must keep
in mind the two times on record when Socrates went against the rulers
of the city. We need to explain the contradiction in light of the
two previous situations in order to avoid charging Socrates with incon
sistency. The first situation occurred imder the Athenian Democracy.
Socrates, a member of the coimcil, was the only one who refused to try
the ten generals who did not pick up the dead soldiers during the battle
of Arginusae. Socrates explicitly states the reason he was prepared to go
against the state:
This [trying the generals at the same time] was illegal, as you all
recognized later. I was the only member of the presiding com
mittee to oppose your doing something contrary to the laws, and I
voted against it. The orators were ready to prosecute me and take
me away, and your shouts were egging them on, but I thought I
should run any risk on the side of law and justice rather than join
you, for fear of prison or death, when you were engaged in an
unjust course. {Apology 32b-c)
The second act was during the reign of the Thirty. The Tyrants
summoned Socrates and ordered him to bring them Leon of Salamis so
that they could execute him. Socrates refused to perform this action as
well, stating again his reasons for disobedience:
Then I showed again, not in words but in action, that, if it were not
rather vulgar to say so, death is something I couldn't care about,
but that my whole concem is not to do anything unjust or impious.
That government, powerful as it was, did not frighten me into any
wrongdoing. {Apology 32 c-d)
Socrates gives three reasons for disobeying the state. In the first situation
the command was illegal and unjust. The second was unjust and
impious. Any explanation would have to account for all these reasons,
or else explain why some may be subordinate to others (e.g., why it is
justifiable to be urdawful as long as one is just and pious).
One explanation is given by Panagiotou. His thesis states that it is
a mistake to identify the PLA's beliefs with those of Socrates. In other
words, Socrates does not believe in the arguments presented by the PLA
(at least not all of them). His main contention is that you cannot explain
the contradiction between the two dialogues if you accept the view that
Socrates and the PLA are one and the same (Panagiotou 96). Plato's
Socrates and Law 51
purpose, Panagiotou states, is to identify Socrates as holding the middle
ground between Crito's view (that there may be a conflict between
morality and law) and the view of the PLA (that there caimot be such a
conflict) (Panagiotou 94). Instead, Socrates believes that it is just to
disobey rmjust laws provided that one "treats the state neither 'imjustly'
nor Taadly'"( Panagiotou 95).
Panagiotou insists that Socrates and the PLA disagree on one
fundamental point: The laws of the state may sometimes be unjust. As
shown above, Socrates admits to Crito that what the state is doing to
him is imjust. Panagiotou states that the PLA agree with Socrates only
temporarily, in order to show him later that what the state does is, by
definition, always just (Panagiotou 107). All that the state admits is a
theoretical possibility that some of its actions are imjust (Panagiotou
109). Regardless of whether the state accepts the view of the objector, the
final outcome will always be the just outcome. The PLA allow only
the claim that the state's actions are unjust.
The PLA then argue that Socrates has agreed to this position,
which is impossible because Socrates disagrees that the verdict is just.
The problem, Panagiotou states, is in the dialectical stance that Socrates
has taken. The state assumes that if Socrates does not persuade the state
that its actions are unjust, and yet decides to disobey anyway, then he is
somehow forcing the state, which does violence to it (Panagiotou 115).
Socrates, however, does not place absolute value on persuasion, but on
trying to persuade. If Socrates cannot persuade his interlocutor, he will
continue to do what he knows to be just:
Socrates, on the other hand, seeks to persuade and wishes, in
retum, to be persuaded. If the persuasive enterprise fails, then one
must act as one sees fit, provided one treats others neither unjustly
nor badly. To act without convincing others is not to force them
but to act as they would not. This mearis simply that they and you
no longer have a common project. Socrates would not deny the
state's claim to obedience from the impersuaded citizen, but he
would also grant the citizen the right to refuse it. (Panagiotou 115)
Panagiotou is right when he speaks of Socrates' dialectical project.
Socrates obviously does not place full value on trying to persuade his
interlocutor (Euthyphro, for example)( Euthyphro 14c). However, the rest
of Panagiotou's argument is not convincing. The PLA do, in fact, give
an example of why certain commands given by the state would be
tmjust. The PLA explicitly state that they only propose laws, they do not
52 Chris Isaac
issue savage commands {Crito 52a). This is an important statement
by the PLA. At the very least, the PLA admit that the relation a citizen
stands in to savage commands is different than the relation the
citizen stands in to duly constituted laws. As such, it is reasonable to
assert that the obligation to obey savage commands is not the same as
the obhgation to obey other laws. With this admission, the PLA imply
that there are some laws that are not constituted in a proper manner,
and thus are not properly regarded as laws. In fact, the PLA and
Socrates would probably agree that savage commands are, by their
nature, illegal, since they do not allow the citizen the right to attempt to
persuade—a right affirmed by both Socrates and the PLA. This would
accoimt for Socrates' refusal to obey the Coimcil of Thirty, for they did
not (presumably) give Socrates an opportunity to convince them of their
unjust request. The problem of the disobedience of Socrates harming the
state will be answered below (Panagiotou's answer is identical to
Santas's in this regard.)
The bigger question is whether Socrates agrees with the position of
the PLA. Santas helps to answer this question by making certain textual
claims. Santas points out that there is a great deal of similarity between
the two dialogues. Not ordy are the views very similar but the central
way in which Socrates conceives the issue is similar (31). It may be true
that Socrates need not agree with the PLA's reasons to agree with its
outcome. But it leads one to wonder why Socrates would irse arguments
he does not agree with to convince Crito of his position. Why not use his
own views to convince Crito? Surely he has reasons for holding those
views.
Furthermore, there are certain passages which seem to indicate
that Socrates does agree with what the PLA are claiming about the state.
Near the beginning of the Crito, Socrates makes the point that he is the
kind of man who "listeris only to the argument that on reflection seems
best to me" {Crito 46b). This language suggests that what is to follow is
an argument that seems best to Socrates. He never suggests that the
argument that the PLA give is not suited to his liking. Socrates also
makes the beginning of the just agreement argument before he uses
the PLA cis a tool to teach Crito {Crito 50a). Finally, at the end of the
dialogue, Socrates exclaims how loudly the arguments of the PLA ring
in his ear {Crito 54d).
One more piece of evidence is warranted. There is at least one time
when Socrates presents an argument( when it was reasonably certain he
was not being ironic) in which he does not fully believe. In the Meno,
Socrates advances an argument which he admits, after he has given it.
Socrates and Law 53
may not be "right in all other respects" {Meno 86b). However, no such
qualifier can be found in the Crito.
Santas's answer is much clearer than that of Panagiotou. Santas's
argument involves a crucial distinction between "all things considered"
and "all things equal" (Santas 45). When one speaks of "all things
considered," that person is taking into account all aspects of the case and
is deciding upon a principle that will always guide his or her actions.
Socrates' statement in the Apology that he will "obey the god rather than
you" {Apology 29d) is such a principle. It is the supreme principle of his
life. "All things equal," however, "[indicates] that we have so far orUy
taken certain principles into account. That we are making a judgement
based on only a subpart of the larger scheme of reasons" Qohn Rawls, as
cited in Santas 46). In other words, when deciding to obey the laws of
the state, Socrates assumes that it is the god's will that he do so. Thus,
Socrates can prioritize his arguments. This distinction can handle the
argument based on just agreements (Santas 51). The argument Socrates
gives in the Apology (namely, that the god has placed Socrates in this
position) can be applied to the Crito, with conflicting results, only if one
does not use this distinction (Santas 47). If we assume that the god is
better than the state, then we can reach a conclusion which satisfies the
contradiction. However, there is one catch. Santas must also show that
by disobeying the law, Socrates is not harming the state. In the Crito,
Socrates seems to offer another principle which he holds "all things
considered":
So then consider very carefully whether we have this view in
common, and whether you agree, and let this be the basis of our
deliberation, that neither to do wrong nor to return a wrong is ever
right, not even to injure in return for an injury received. Or do you
disagree and do not share this view as a basis for discussion? I
have held it for a long time and still hold it now, but if you think
otherwise, tell me now.{ Crito 49d-e; my emphasis)
Santas must show that Socrates, by disobeying the law, does not harm
the state. 1 believe his answer is insufficient. Santas proposes that there
is a fundamental difference between secret disobedience and open
disobedience. The former harms the state while the latter does not:
[Socrates'] being willing to accept the penalty and not trying to
evade it by escaping it shows that by deciding to disobey the order
he does not intend to subvert and destroy the laws of his city, but
54 Chris Isaac
rather has respect for the laws and recognizes that he must, in
general, obey the laws.( Santas 50)
Suppose I have some moral reason to disobey all traffic laws. If a
policeman pulls up behind me, I can either attempt to evade (secret
disobedience), or pull over and gladly pay the penalty (open disobedi
ence). Do my actions, by openly disobeying, necessarily not harm the
state? If all people were to disobey openly, could the state function?
Woozley makes a similar point while talking about a thoroughly evil
legal system: "But against that [all people disobeying all laws] it can be
objected that a 100 per cent pernicious legal system could not exist, for it
could not meet one of the necessary conditioirs of being a legal system,
viz., that of actually regulating men's conduct" (Woozley 317; my
emphasis). It does not necessarily follow that a willingness to accept the
penalty does not harm the state. In fact, this is not the argument the FLA
make. The state is destroyed not by the imwillingness to accept the
penalty but by the refusal to be regulated by laws {Crito 50b). Socrates,
by openly disobeying, is still, as far as it is in his power, trying to change
the laws. As was said previously, the principle of harm depends upon
the individual's making himself or herself the exception to the laws,
even if in fact all persons must disobey all laws in order to destroy the
state. As far as the FLA are concerned, a single individual's action of
disobedience is enough to cause the harm. Thus, the argument from
harm stiQ stands. If, in some sense, even open disobedience harms the
state (which I think cannot be denied) then it is still wrong for Socrates
to disobey the jury: 1. All things considered, it is always wrong to inflict
injury. 2. By breaking the law openly you are inflicting an injiuy. 3. The
court has hypothetically commanded Socrates to cease philosophizing.
4. If Socrates were to disobey the court order, he would be breaking the
law. 5. By breaking the law, Socrates is inflicting injury. 6. It is wrong to
inflict injury. Therefore: 7. Socrates must obey the court order.
The problem with the previous interpretations is the way that
Santas and Fanagiotou try to subordinate Socrates' principles: To obey
god is better than the court, etc. While I admit that this is a very reason
able interpretation, it suffers from possible contradictions with Socrates'
other long-standing beliefs (e.g., the argument from harm). Is there
another way to reconcile the god's command with those beliefs? We do
know,f or example, that the gods believe that lawful living is an example
of piety {Crito 31b-c). We can also safely assume the god commanded
Socrates to obey the FLA (at least before the trial). Hence Socrates finds
himself with corxflicting obligations. He knows he needs to obey the
Socrates and Law 55
laws for two reasons: First, because it is pious to do so. Second, if he
does not he will harm the city. He knows he needs to philosophize
because he has been placed in that position by the god. But he has been
put in a situation where he cannot do both. What should he do? Socrates
makes the ordy decision that he can make. Socrates freely chooses to die
in order to avoid breaking either command. We know from Xenophon
that he is willing to accept this alternative (see previous discussion).
One question that arises continually when we read the Apology is
why Socrates uses the defense he does. It is obviously not suited to
getting him acquitted from the charges. Santas even points out that
some of the arguments Socrates gives in his defense are not valid.i
What is going on here? Xenophon may be of some help. He states that
the god purposely stopped Socrates from trying to gain an acquittal
(42-43). The god, at previous times, always provided a negative check
on Socrates' behavior. But the god did not try to prevent his execution.
Socrates himself believes that death was where the god was leading him
{Crito 54e). Perhaps Xenophon was correct in claiming that the god
purposely took him? If this is the case, then perhaps the entire Apology
should be read not as a defense, but as Socrates' last attempt to instruct
the Athenians. If this is true then an alternate interpretation of the
dialogue is justified.
I propose that the passage that speaks about the hypothetical
sentence can be seen as a speech meant to persuade. Certain textual
inferences can be made to this point. The jury could pick only from
punishment "A" (advanced by the prosecution) or punishment "B"
(advanced by the defense)( Teloh 100). One must wonder why Socrates
would even make such a speech if he were never going to offer the
penalty. The only plausible interpretation is that Socrates was
attempting to teach and persuade the Athenians about why it would be
wrong for him to offer silence as a penalty. Threats are not usually made
by those who have no reason to make threats. Socrates could very well
have used the argument from harm to convince the jury why such a
sentence would be imjust, provided an extra assumption (number 2,
which seems very plausible) be applied. 1. It is never right to do
wrong. 2. It is never right to force others to do wrong. 3. To disobey
god is wrong and impious. 4. Socrates has been commanded by the god
to philosophize. 5. Socrates has agreed to abide by the PLA. 6. The
^"Therefore, even if believing in spiritual beings entails believing in gods, it
remains possible that these gods are not the gods the city believes in" (32).
56 Chris Isaac
hypothetical sentence would force Socrates to either disobey the god or
disobey the laws. 7. To disobey the god is wrong. 8. To disobey the state
causes harm. 9. It is wrong to force others to do wrong or harm. 10.
Therefore, the jury ought not to sentence Socrates to stop philoso
phizing. Socrates is faced with death, exile, or silence {Crito 54e). He
cannot choose silence, will not accept exile, and thus chooses death
(which is really not a penalty in his view).
If we can rightly interpret the Apology in this way then we solve
the contradiction of the hypothetical sentence. All we must now show is
why disobeying the order of the Thirty Tyrants was an act of lawful
behavior. Xenophon points out several instances in which Socrates
refused to break established law, and emphatically states that the order
of the Thirty was one of them:
He [Socrates] disobeyed the illegal orders of the Thirty: first, when
they forbade him to converse with the young, and second, when
they instructed him, with some others, to arrest a citizen for
execution, he alone disobeyed on the ground that what he was
ordered to do was illegal. When he was facing prosecution by
Meletus, he rejected as illegal the usual practice in courts of law.
.. . But although Socrates might easily have been acquitted if he
had made even a moderate concession to common practice,
he chose to abide by the law and die, rather than break it and live.
(195)
Whether what the Thirty asked him to do was illegal under Oli-
garchichal law, was illegal because the government itself was illegal, or
was illegal imder Athenian law does not matter.^ If Socrates had agreed
to abide by laws only, and not by the savage commands of men, he was
justified in disobeying the command of the Tyrants.3
If we adopt this view, all three of the situations above can be
construed imder one principle: Socrates has agreed to abide by estab-
^Santas 38. Santas states that Socrates may have believed that properly consti
tuted laws occur only under a democratic regime. How these statements can be
brought into harmony with Socrates' other antidemocrahc statements is unclear.
^An argument could be made that Socrates never agreed to abide by the
Tyrants' laws as he did under the Democracy. After a change in the type of
government, all previous agreements with the government are no longer valid.
Socrates may never have agreed to abide by laws that could be issued at the
whim of dictators.
Socrates and Law 57
lished law. When this principle came in conflict with the others, he
freely chose death to escape contradiction.
In conclusion, I have argued for the position that Socrates believed
in following established laws. I have also outlined the arguments of the
two dialogues and discussed possible solutions to the contradiction.
There are many unanswered questions as well as possible problems
with my accormt (i.e., Xenophon's credibility). I offer this solution only
as a possibility, finding the others to be insufficient both textually and
logically. Socrates seems to recognize that certain political systems are
unjust and that political obligations are taken on by the public only
through contractual agreement. Others who developed the Social
Contract theory obviously looked to Socrates as a forerunner.
58 Chris Isaac
Works Cited
Kant, Immanuel. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. New York:
Harper & Row,1 964.
Kraut, Richard. Socrates and the State. Princeton: Princeton UP,1 984.
Panagiotou, Spiro. "Socrates and Civil Disobedience." Socratic Questions.
Ed. Barry S. Gower and Michael C. Stokes. New York: Rout-
ledge, Chapman and Hall, 1991.
Plato. Apology. Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
—.C rito. Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
—.E uthyphro. Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
—.M eno. Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981.
Santas, Gerasimos Xenophon. Socrates: Philosophy in Plato's Early
Dialogues. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.
Teloh, Herury. Socratic Education in Plato's Early Dialogues. Notre Dame:
U of Notre Dame,1 986.
Woozley, A. D. "Socrates on Disobeying the Law." The Philosophy of
Socrates. Ed. Gregory Vlastos. Notre Dame: Notre Dame Press,
1971.
Xenophon. Conversations of Socrates. Trans. Hugh Tredennick and Robin
Waterfield. New York: Penguin, 1990.