Aporia vol. 35 no. 2—2025
The Tall Tale of the Paradox of Fiction:
Diagnosing and Dissolving the Problem of
Emotional Responses to Fiction
Conor Jedam
In this paper, I explore a metaphysical assumption underlying the
paradox of fiction and its solutions. Furthermore, I show this assump-
tion, namely that there is a distinction between mind-dependent, fictional
states of affairs, and mind-independent reality, to be a problem which
undermines the paradox. In the first section, I provide a brief history of
the philosophical discussion regarding the relationship between art and
emotion before describing the paradox itself, the standard moves philoso-
phers have suggested to resolve the paradox, and sketch some of the most
notable constructive solutions. Importantly, I also draw out the metaphys-
ics suggested by the paradox’s requirement that emotion about some entity
implies belief in that entity’s existence. In the second section, I undermine
the distinction between fictional and non-fictional entities, and the related
Augustinian picture of language, to show that it is ill-equipped to deal with
the question of fiction. I argue that instead, Wittgenstein’s use-theory of
meaning and language-games, which do not make metaphysical commit-
ments, make sense of the paradox of fiction by accounting for the various
contexts in which emotional responses occur. If we accept Wittgenstein’s
account of language use, then the paradox dissolves, in part because
Conor Jedam recently graduated from The University of Queensland with a Bachelor of
Arts with Honours Class I in the Field of Philosophy. His thesis explores how political
agency and ethical subjectivity are promoted by imagining the future, particularly in the
form of dystopian cinema, through proleptic engagement with fear. He is looking forward to
working and researching at UQ in 2026 and pursuing a PhD in the future.
41 Conor Jedam
Radford does not consider the importance of language-games in mediating
the relationship between the fictional and non-fictional. Additionally, by
uncoupling meaning and metaphysics, I cast doubt upon the requirement
that the paradox of fiction places on existence for genuine emotional
responses. The paper follows a distinctly quietist approach by first diag-
nosing the problem and coming to an understanding of the terms of the
debate, followed by the dissolution of the problem by calling into question
the grounds upon which the debate sits.1
1.0 Diagnosis
1.1 The Philosophical History of the Relationship between Art and Emotion
Philosophical discussion of the relationship between art and emotion
has a long history, stretching back to Aristotle. In the Poetics, Aristotle
claimed that in order to write a tragedy or epic poem which truly elicits
emotional responses such as fear and pity in its audience, the author must
provide a mimesis, or imitation, of a situation with serious ethical stakes. In
the context of these artistic forms, the audience not only experiences fear
and pity, but also a katharsis of both (Freeman 249). In other words, one
function of tragedy and epic poetry is to allow the audience to engage with
emotions and experience a sense of relief from them, without being placed
in harm’s way (Graham 36). More than two-thousand years later, David
Hume also considered why we enjoy tragic fiction and developed a psycho-
logical notion of katharsis. Hume suggested that we derive pleasure from
experiencing emotions like fear and pity in response to fiction (Freeman
249). In 1975, Colin Radford considered this puzzling relationship and
proposed the paradox of fiction.
1.2 The Paradox of Fiction
In, “How Can We Be Moved by the Fate of Anna Karenina?,” Radford
posits three highly intuitive and seemingly plausible premises. According
to Radford, when these premises are taken together, they demonstrate
that emotional responses to fiction are irrational (Freeman 249). That is,
1 Thomas J. Spiegel, “What is Philosophical Quietism (Wittgensteinian or Otherwise)?,” in
Quietism, Agnosticism and Mysticism: Mapping the Philosophical Discourse of the East and the West, ed.
Krishna Mani Pathak, Springer, 2021, p. 22.
The Tall Tale of The Paradox of fiCTion 42
having an emotional response to a fictional entity when one is aware of
their status as fictional, “involves us in inconsistency and so incoherence,”
because the emotional response itself implies belief that the entity exists
non-fictionally (Radford and Weston 78). While the rational actor would
cease their emotional response upon learning that the entity is fictional,
many of us do not, and even have emotional responses to entities we know
are fictional from the outset (68). The first premise of the paradox states
that we do, in fact, have emotional responses to fictional entities (71). We
weep at tragic deaths, cheer at moments of victory, and shudder in fright
when we see the killer approaching an unwitting suspect. The second
premise raises the point that we do not believe that fictional entities exist
(70–1). We know that nobody really suffered a tragic death, we know the
victory is made up, and we know that the killer poses no real harm. The
third premise states that genuine emotional responses to fictional entities
imply that we believe such entities exist (68).
To substantiate this final claim Radford provides an example.
Imagine you read an account of a group of people who are suffering an
awful situation. Given your humanity, you will be moved in some way by
learning about this horrible state of affairs (68). After learning about the
plight of these people you may even begin to grieve. Then, you discover
the story is a complete fabrication. Radford suggests you could no longer
continue to grieve since it would be irrational (68). From this, Radford
concludes that we may only be emotionally moved by the plight of others if
we believe something appropriate has happened to them. In this sense, an
emotional response to any entity, implies belief in said entity (68). So, for
Radford it does not make sense to have emotional responses to fiction and
it is a genuine paradox (Freeman 249).
1.3 Rejecting the Paradox
Of course, many philosophers in the following years have attempted
to break the paradox of fiction, usually by rejecting at least one of its
premises. As I am adopting a quietist approach to philosophical inquiry,
it is important that prior to dissolving the paradox of fiction I am familiar
with the terms of the debate which surrounds it. This allows for an under-
standing of the assumptions upon which the debate takes place. It is not to
any particular response to the paradox that I critically respond, but these
underlying assumptions which I find to be problematic, and which lead to
the paradox’s dissolution in section two.
Kendall Walton suggests that emotional responses to fiction
are not genuine and replaces them with quasi-emotions, which are
43 Conor Jedam
phenomenologically identical to ordinary emotions, but do not require
belief in the existence of the object of the quasi-emotion (Freeman 249).
For Walton, this is what it means to engage in make-believe (Tullmann
and Buckwalter 781). In order to reject the second premise, another group
of thinkers have evoked Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who posited that when
engaging with fiction we willingly suspend our disbelief, and in doing so
can temporarily hold belief in the existence of objects we would, under
regular circumstances, regard as non-existent (782).
Two branches have emerged which reject the final premise, which
suggests that genuine emotional responses to fictional entities imply our
belief in their existence (782–83). Those who hold a non-cognitivist theory
of emotion can simply reject the notion that emotion requires belief (782).
On the other hand, there are those who maintain that emotions have a
cognitive aspect, but reject that this aspect involves belief (783). A string of
thinkers, including Peter Lamarque, Noël Carroll and Murray Smith hold
this view. While they accept that belief is required for emotional responses
to non-fictional entities, they suggest that those who consider this a para-
digmatic feature of emotional responses in general are mistaken (Freeman
248). According to this group, we might imaginatively propose, entertain
in thought, or mentally represent the existence of fictional objects (248).
The common trait among all these solutions is that they are constructive,
which is to say that they build some system, or framework, which attempts
to adequately capture the relationship between emotion and fiction
(Spiegel 220).
1.4 Other Responses
Rejecting at least one premise is not the only route philosophers have
taken in response to Radford’s paradox. Michael Weston’s response, origi-
nally published alongside Radford’s paper, took issue with the claim that
it is a brute fact about humans that we can have emotions in response to
fictional entities (Radford and Weston 81). Instead, Weston suggests that
emotional responses to fictional entities are actually emotional responses
to works of art (81). In this sense, what we are responding to is not fictional
at all, but rather an art object in the world.
Although my primary goal in this paper is to dissolve the paradox,
my own solution in this tradition is to call into question Radford’s appeal
to the notion of irrationality. It is an unnecessarily strong claim to suggest
that emotions divorced from belief are irrational, in the sense that they are
not logically coherent. Given this framework, it is the case that we have
irrational emotions about non-fictional entities as a matter of course. This
The Tall Tale of The Paradox of fiCTion 44
is what it is to have a phobia, or to fear our own death even if we believe the
experience of death to be equivalent to dreamless sleep (78–9). My sugges-
tion is that it makes sense to talk about whether emotional responses are
justified, rather than rational, since the notion of justification can capture
a greater degree of complexity in the way we give, compare and weigh the
reasons for our emotional states.
More recently, Katherine Tullmann and Wesley Buckwalter have
argued, with reference to theories of emotion, that the paradox falls apart
once we begin to consider the various ways in which the word ‘exist’ can
be used (Tullmann and Buckwalter 784-5). Since existence can be taken to
mean either existing as a concrete object, having the potential to exist as a
concrete object in some possible world, or existing as an imaginary object,
and no theory of emotion makes the use of existence uniform between the
paradox’s second and third premises, Tullmann and Buckwalter conclude
there is no such thing as the paradox of fiction (793). They are right to
consider the limitations of the language required to make sense of and
criticise the paradox. In the following sections, I delve further into this
notion of existence and, without reference to theories of emotion, dissolve
the paradox of fiction by calling into question the basic metaphysical
picture it posits.
1.5 The Metaphysical Picture Underpinning the Paradox
Although Radford does not explicitly qualify which picture, or
pictures, of existence he is committed to, clarifying the distinction
between fictional and non-fictional entities is crucial to making sense of
his paradox. While Tullmann and Buckwalter suggest that Radford uses
existence in a general rather than technical sense, the paradox itself rests
upon the dichotomy between those things which really exist, the non-
fictional, and those things which do not really exist, the fictional (784).
Furthermore, we should not take for granted that this distinction is undis-
putable or necessary (Matravers 96). Let us return to the paradox itself to
further tease out Radford’s commitments.
For Radford, emotional responses to entities imply belief in the
existence of these entities. In other words, it is only rational for me to recoil
in my seat during a screening of John Carpenter’s 1978 film, Halloween, if I
believe that the masked killer, Michael Myers, poses a real threat to me. Of
course, Michael Myers can only be a real threat if he is a real person that
exists out there in the world. This description, extrapolated from Radford’s
paper, is indicative of a commitment to the notion that those things which
exist, do so in a mind-independent reality. That is, whether I have it in
45 Conor Jedam
mind or not, Stonehenge really exists on Salisbury Plain. Stonehenge is
actual and I can have rational emotional responses to it.
On the other hand, Michael Myers cannot be a real threat if he is
merely made up, imagined, the stuff of fiction. There may exist pictures
of Michael Myers projected onto the cinema screen, and his name may
appear written in the screenplay, but these are not instances of Michael
Myers himself. These concrete signifiers of Myers are the result of his first
being imagined. That is to say that Michael Myers is mind-dependent, and
so too is the entire fictional reality, the town of Haddonfield, Illinois, in
which he goes about his murdering. It is nonsensical to say Haddonfield
exists independently of whatever mind conceived of it. Furthermore, when
Haddonfield is thought about, it does not suddenly appear in the physical
world such that one could measure the distance between it and Stonehenge.
This dualism made up of real, mind-independent, existing things on one
hand, and fictional, mind-dependent, non-existent things on the other,
is the basic metaphysical assumption underpinning Radford’s paradox of
fiction.
2.0 Dissolution
2.1 Augustinian Meaning
The metaphysical commitment implied by the distinction between
the fictional and non-fictional raises questions regarding the use of
language. In particular, we must investigate what it is we are referring to
when we refer to either fictional or non-fictional entities. In the case of
non-fictional entities, it is consistent with Radford’s position, that we refer
to things out there in the world (McNally 8). That is, there is a worldly object
to which I am referring when I say, ‘Stonehenge is on Salisbury Plain.’
The arrangement of rocks that make up Stonehenge and the geographical
location of Salisbury Plain give meaning to my statement. In another way,
the statement makes sense because we know what it describes (8).
Conversely, we can question what it is we refer to when we refer
to fictional entities. When I say, ‘Michael Myers is murdering people in
Haddonfield,’ there is nothing in the world which stands for the terms
‘Michael Myers’ or ‘Haddonfield.’ So, given the picture we are working with
for now, this statement does not carry meaning. Importantly, it is different
from the statement, ‘In the film Halloween, the character of Michael
Myers murders people, and the film is set in a place called Haddonfield.’
In this case, the object in the world, to which I am referring is the film,
The Tall Tale of The Paradox of fiCTion 46
Halloween. In other words, we can make sense of this statement, because
we know what it describes. This referential way of accounting for meaning
in language is attributed by Ludwig Wittgenstein to Augustine of Hippo
(Wittgenstein 1). Like Wittgenstein, I find that the Augustinian picture of
language lacks the tools to properly account for language use. In particular,
it is ill-equipped to deal with the complex ways in which we emotionally
engage with fictional entities. It is not possible to account for the grief,
rage, and fear which give rise to Radford’s paradox while restricting oneself
to an Augustinian account of language.
2.2 Meaning as Use
For Wittgenstein, the Augustinian picture of language is simply too
limited in its applicability to actual language use (McNally 13 and Addis
97). If referential language use is predicated on the notions that words name
objects and sentences are made up of these words, then the meaning of a
word is the object for which it stands (McNally 9). In this sense, words are
connected mentally with objects, and to understand a sentence is to know
what it describes (9). We can explain the meaning of words by ostensive
definition, that is by gesturing towards the referent of a word as we say
it (Wittgenstein 27 and McNally 13). For example, I stand on Salisbury
Plain, point at the arrangement of rocks and say, ‘That is Stonehenge.’
For Wittgenstein, this is the historically pervasive understanding of how
language works (Addis 97). For me, it is clearly an assumption in Radford’s
paradox since emotional responses are only rational when they are associ-
ated with non-fictional entities. In the same way that ostensive definitions
are made by referring to an object in the world, for Radford emotions are
only rational when they exist in response to something non-fictional.
However, to suppose that words have meaning insofar as they cor-
respond with objects is to impose a mistaken functional uniformity.
Wittgenstein rejects this uniformity and claims instead that words have
a variety of functions in use, and carry different meanings in different
contexts (Wittgenstein 23). Like tools, we can use words in diverse and
complicated ways for different purposes (11). So, given the complexity of
language and its uses, we must examine how it is that most of the time we
are not prone to errors of confusion and ambiguity. How is it we still engage
in meaningful language use? According to Wittgenstein, “for a large class
of cases… the meaning of a word is its use in language” (43). It is not the
case that there is a metaphysical system tied to language use, since it is not
necessary for an existing object to make sense of a word or sentence (Addis
102). Words and sentences only have meaning within certain linguistic
47 Conor Jedam
systems (Skelac and Jandric 45). The meaning of a word is the way in which
it is used, and use is only meaningful if it abides by the rules of a system.
2.3 Language-Games
These systems in which language makes sense are called, by
Wittgenstein, language-games (Wittgenstein 7). Ordinary language use
is a complex network of overlapping and interconnected language games
(Skelac and Jandric 45). Each language-game is related to its context of
use, as well as its community of users (45 and Conant 239). Importantly,
as a game, language is governed by rules (Wittgenstein 31). The relevant
linguistic community is responsible for establishing the rules and con-
ventions of the game, though not in a formal, organised sense. Rather,
members agree upon meaningful use in the way they respond, both
verbally and physically, to each other and their shared environment (Skelac
and Jandric 45). So, there are rules which govern whether some utterance
has one meaning, some other meaning, or no meaning at all in any given
context. In this sense, language-games can show us the context where the
use of an utterance is of significance. It rejects the referential system and
its metaphysics, and situates language by reminding us that we cannot
separate a statement from its speaker, audience, location or time (Conant
239). So, the context of any utterance as well as its recognition in a linguis-
tic community is fundamental to understanding its meaning.
2.4 Making Sense in the Context of Fiction
I now turn back to the paradox of fiction. Armed with an under-
standing of meaning which does not have metaphysical commitments and
a description of language which accounts for context, we can reject the
idea that emotional response implies belief, which leads to the notion of
irrational emotions. Furthermore, we can make the case that in the realm
of responses to fiction, there are language-games at play which make state-
ments and behaviours meaningful, which in other instances would cause
confusion. Once we recognise that Radford’s formulation of the paradox is
not a problem inherent in emotional responses to fiction, but a misapplica-
tion of terms from one language-game to another, the paradox is dissolved.
To demonstrate how language-games can make sense of what
Radford would regard as irrational, I return to the previous examples.
While Radford would suggest that it is irrational to recoil in fear from the
screen when Michael Myers appears, Wittgenstein contends that, so long
as this is a generally understood behaviour within the context of seeing a
The Tall Tale of The Paradox of fiCTion 48
horror film, then it makes sense. If you were to lean over to your friend,
and whisper into their ear something like, ‘Michael is scary,’ this would be
a meaningful statement. If you were to whisper into their ear, ‘three years
ago to the day I ate oatmeal for the last time,’ this would not make sense,
even if it were a true statement. The metaphysical truth of the statement
is irrelevant. It would be nonsense, because a remark of this sort does not
cohere with the rules of the appropriate language-game. It would be rea-
sonable to say that, among the right people, in the right location, and at the
right time, a statement like, ‘I fear Michael Myers … it’s so creepy the way
he sneaks around Haddonfield murdering teenagers,’ is not taken to mean
that someone holds a belief in Myers’ existence, nor that their emotions
are irrational. The statement is understood by the other members of the
community, and is probably taken not to entail belief in the existence of
Myers or Haddonfield. So, statements like, ‘I am scared by Michael Myers,’
and, ‘I feel sorry for his victims,’ are meaningful in their use, rather than
irrational in relation to their objects. It is not that irrationality is directly
opposed to meaning, but rather that since language is not predicated on a
particular metaphysics, an utterance’s relevance is governed by the rules of
the language-game at play.
I am not suggesting that there is exactly one language-game in play
among theatre-goers, fiction readers, or film watchers. In reality, language-
games are always overlapping each other and speakers are frequently
switching between games successfully. The above examples are meant to
demonstrate that in the contexts where we have emotional responses to
fiction, language-games come into play which allow for meaningful verbal
and physical expressions of these emotions. Interestingly, both Aristotle
and Hume account for the relevance of context, and in their accounts
the context of engaging with fiction performs a unique and important
function (Freeman 249).
My final claim is that Radford is guilty of removing terms from their
context of meaning, thereby giving rise to the confusion which allows for
the paradox to take shape. It is fair enough to say we no longer grieve
upon learning the story that caused our grief is false (Radford and Weston
68). However, we do not stop grieving because it would be irrational to
continue. Rather, we stop grieving because we have learned that we have
misapplied our language-games. Furthermore, this is the exact kind of
language misuse that Wittgenstein considered responsible for all philo-
sophical conundrums (Skelac and Jandric 46).
49 Conor Jedam
Conclusion
Although the relationship between emotion and fiction has a long
philosophical history, and Radford’s explication of the paradox is seemingly
intuitive, it stands on metaphysically shaky ground. The central distinction
between fictional and non-fictional entities, which gives rise to the notion
that emotional response to an object implies belief in its existence, is a
confusion about the way language is used, rather than a genuine problem.
Moreover, the myriad constructive solutions that attempt to solve the
paradox fall into the same trap of dividing the world up into the mind-
independent realm, and the mind-dependent realm. This metaphysical
commitment, and its associated picture of language, is ill-equipped to deal
with questions regarding fictional entities, since the problem of reference
will inevitably arise. Instead, Wittgenstein’s use-theory of meaning, and his
account of overlapping language-games capture the context-specific nature
of meaning. In this essay I have followed a quietist method by first diagnos-
ing the terms of this philosophical debate, and then dissolving the problem
by calling into question its metaphysical foundations. Furthermore, I
have applied Wittgenstein’s account of language to the real-life context of
emotional responses to fiction, and dissolved the paradox of fiction at the
same time. Radford’s paradox of fiction, and the debate it has spawned, do
not arise if we accept Wittgenstein’s view that words are granted meaning
when used within specific contexts which abide by socially constructed and
accepted rules, rather than rationality when used to refer to non-fictional
entities. In doing so, we can reject the notion that emotional responses
imply belief in the existence of the entities which elicit them. Furthermore,
we can emotionally engage with our favourite fictions without fear of being
charged with the crime of irrationality.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Addis, Mark. Wittgenstein: A Guide for the Perplexed. Continuum, 2006.
Conant, James “Wittgenstein on Meaning and Use.” Philosophical
Investigations, vol. 21, no. 3, 1998, 222–50.
Freeman, Damien. “The Paradox of Fiction.” In The Routledge Companion
to Philosophy of Literature, edited by Noël Carroll and John Gibson.
Routledge, 2016.
Graham, Gordon. Philosophy of the Arts: An introduction to aesthetics.
Routledge, 2005.
Matravers, Derek. “Recent philosophy and the fiction/non-fiction
distinction.” Collection and Curation, vol. 27, no. 2, 2018, pp. 93–6.
McNally, Thomas. Wittgenstein and the Philosophy of Language: The Legacy of
the Philosophical Investigations. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Radford, Colin and Michael Weston. “How Can We Be Moved by the
Fate of Anna Karenina?” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
Supplementary Volumes 49, 1975, pp. 67–93.
Skelac, Ines and Andrej Jandric. “Meaning as Use: From Wittgenstein to
Google’s Word2vec.” In Guide to Deep Learning Basics: Logical Historical
and Philosophical Perspectives, edited by Sandro Skansi, Springer, 2020.
Spiegel, Thomas J. “What is Philosophical Quietism (Wittgensteinian or
Otherwise)?.” In Quietism, Agnosticism and Mysticism: Mapping the
Philosophical Discourse of the East and the West, edited by Krishna Mani
Pathak, Springer, 2021.
Stecker, Robert. “Should We Still Care about the Paradox of Fiction?.”
British Journal of Aesthetics 51, no. 3, 2011, pp. 295–308.
Tullmann, Katherine and Wesley Buckwalter. “Does the Paradox of Fiction
Exist?.” Erkenntnis, vol. 79, no. 4, 2014, pp. 779–96.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M.
Anscombe, Macmillan Publishing, 1958.