Aporia Vol. 6, 1996
What a Theory of Mental Health
Should Be but Cannot Be
David A. Jensen
Introduction
In the debate over the relevance and success of current mental health
theory (and practice), Christopher Boorse argues, in his paper "What
a Theory of Mental Health Should Be," that mental health should be
modeled on the paradigm of physiological medicine. Indeed, his ambi
tious project promises a revolution in mental health, one similar to
that of physiological medicine following the development of the germ
theory. However, can Boorse's recommendations for a new theory of men
tal health hold up? In fact, the very Davidsonian principles on which
Boorse grounds his project, those of mental causation and mental auton
omy, also render such a theory impossible.
In this essay, 1 will first explain Boorse's proposal for a new theory
of mental health. Second, 1 will show how Davidson's principle of the
anomalism of the mental, which follows from the same premises that
Boorse explicitly accepts, essentially eliminates the efficacy of his pro
ject for mental health. TTiird, 1 will address one criticism of Davidson's
argument which, if correct, would refute my critique of Boorse.
Boorse's Project for Mental Health
Boorse's proposal for a new theory of mental health stems from a
debate among mental health theorists. While some theorists advocate
David is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University. He
intends to begin graduate studies this fall in philosophy. This essay was awarded first
place in the 1996 David H. Yam Philosophical Essay Competition.
2 D AVID A. JENSEN
abandoning the very idea of mental "health," others, who are not so
inclined, nevertheless disagree greatly about the definition and goals of
mental health care (29).' The root of the problem, Boorse notes, arises
from basing mental health only partially on the paradigm of physiolo
gical health and medicine (29). From physiological medicine, mental
health has borrowed the notion of health as well as other important
assumptions (29-30). However, mental health theory has not accepted
all the implications of physiological theory. Specifically, it has failed to
adopt a strict notion of causal agents as both the cause of, and means of
treatment for, a mental disease.
There are two directions, then, that can be taken in response to
the current problems. On the one hand, we could completely aban
don the physiological vocabulary and reestablish our understanding of
mental health on some other model (30). Or we could maintain our use
of the physiological model, but accept all its features and implications.
Boorse argues for the latter option.
Building his theory of mental health on the physiological model,
Bootse clarifies exactly what that model is. One crucial notion is that of
health itself. Boorse defines a healthy organism as one that is not dis
eased. Then, he defines disease as a "type of internal state of the organ
ism" which "interferes with the performance of some natural function"
and is not "in the nature of the species" (30). This notion of disease, he
stresses, is value free.^
'I consider the problems of mental health care to be a given. Boorse
notes: "In most respects, our institutions of mental health are recent offshoots
from physiological medicine, and their nature and future are under continual
controversy. ... It seems an open question whether current applications of the
health vocabulary to mental conditions have any justification at all" ("On
the Distinction" 50). Also, he recognizes the views of some, such as Szasz, who
consider the idea of mental illness as "scientifically worthless and socially
harmful" (Boorse," What a Theory" 29).
^As Boorse notes in another paper, this notion of disease as something
that interferes with natural functions is very Platonic ("On the Distinction"
58); that is, it is Platonic in that it defines a thing's goodness or wellness by how
well it functions. This same notion of a thing's excellence (virtue or arete) being
how well it performs its function is also developed significantly by Aristotle.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 3
Disease, however, must be distinguished from illness. A disease is
an illness "only if it is serious enough to be incapacitating" and is thus
"undesirable for its bearer, ... a title to special treatment,. .. and a valid
excuse for normally criticizable behavior" (30-31).^ Boorse notes that
he will focus on a theory of mental disease (not illness).
Based on this paradigm of health and disease, Boorse argues that
mental health, theoretically speaking, does not differ from physical
health (31). That is, disease occurs in the mind in the same cause-effect
manner that it exhibits in the body. To support this claim, two condi
tions must be satisfied. One, there must be mental causation. Although
philosophers disagree on this issue, Boorse appeals to Davidson and his
arguments in favor of mental causation.^ Two, mental functions must
be uniform across the species. Boorse appeals to Chomsky and Piaget for
this point (31).
'It will be difficult to be objective with the notion of illness, especially in
mental health. In fact, in his paper "On the Distinction between Disease and
Illness," Boorse states that the application of this distinction to mental illness
is problematic. These difficulties contribute to the problems of current mental
health paradigms which 1 shall mention later (paradigms that Boorse himself
criticizes in advancing his project for a new theory). Boorse does mention, how
ever, that his new theory of mental health is specifically concerned with the
concept of disease, not illness. For example, most people experience a regular
amount of tooth decay. This is certainly a disease, and a causal agent can be
identified. However, as regular brushing prevents serious incapacitation, or
"normally criticizable behavior," we would not want to label it an illness.
When a disease should be considered an illness is, it appears, another issue,
for societal discretion. But Boorse need not at this time worry ahout which
diseases should be considered illnesses, just that disease in the mental realm can
exhibit the same features as disease in the physical realm (specifically causality).
''Boorse appeals to Davidson's influential paper "Actions, Reasons and
Causes" (1963). The notion of causation Davidson defends here later becomes
one of the three principles he tries to reconcile in "Mental Events" (1970), an
essay to which both Boorse and 1 shall refer. And it is significant to note that
Davidson's argument that mental causation does not contradict the anomalism
of the mental, as elaborated in "Mental Events," is indicated, though not fully
developed, in "Actions, Reasons and Causes" (see 15-16).
4 D AVID A. JENSEN
Critics of Boorse's project argue that it involves a sort of Cartesian
dualism, which, consequently, would result in positing "disease entities
within this immaterial soul" (32).^ The criticism essentially states that
if there is no dualism, then the "mind" is entirely physical, and there is
no need for a mental health apart from physiological health (32). But,
if there is a dualism, even of beliefs and desires as opposed to the hrain
and body, hence justifying a distinct mental theory, then we are left
with all the ptoblems of traditional Cartesian dualism. Boorse tesponds
to this accusation by another appeal to Davidson. If every mental event
is a physical event then we can assume that every mental state (such as
a mental disease) is a physical state (33). But, following Davidson, men
tal states are "dated conditions of specific persons, rather than univer
sal, i.e. types of conditions" (33). As such, type-to-type statements are
not valid. That is, a mental phenomenon will not always have the same
corresponding physical phenomenon. He states: "There is no guarantee
that a mentalistically defined disease-type will coincide with any physio
logically defined disease-type" ( 33). Essentially, he is asserting Davidson's
principle of anomalous monism (which 1 shall address below).
Because the mental withstands reduction to the physical, a disease
must be classified not accotding to some corresponding physical state,
but on the basis of "feelings, beliefs, and experiences" (34).^ Hence,
'Boorse actually states the criticism in terms of two objections. The first
is that it results in Cartesian dualism. The second is that it posits "disease enti
ties within this immaterial soul" instead of determining disease based on rule
following, social factors, and so forth. The first part of the second objection is
really only a consequence of accepting the first objection. And the second part
of the second objection is not really an objection, but rather an affirmation of
the status quo, which Boorse shall argue against later. Hence, it seems that there
is only one real objection here, that of Cartesian dualism.
®This may sound as though Boorse is denying physically induced mental
disease. 1 do not think he is. He would certainly recognize physical problems
which cause mental disease. But then, 1 think he would argue that that would
be an issue of physiology, and such diseases should not be defined as mental in
the first place. His concern is with strictly mental disease. Although there has
been great progress in the treatment of some mental disease with physiological
remedies (for example, drugs), this progress by no means guarantees that all can
be so treated, nor does it imply strict reduction.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 5
Boorse determines that the problem of dualism has been resolved.
According to Davidson's argument, every mental act is physical; thus,
there is no dualism. However, because the causal chain of (mentalistic)
explanation cannot be reduced to physical causes, an autonomous sci
ence of mental health is justified.
Given that an independent field of mental health is justified,
Boorse then examines and rejects current theories of mental health.
One such theory bases a person's mental health on his or her fulfilling a
set of (arbitrarily chosen) personality traits. A second theory abstracts
conditions for mental disease from a set of already agreed upon instances
of disease (36). A third favors examining behavior based on predeter
mined criteria of normal behavior. This also leads to a related method of
using the norms of the social or cultural system as a standard (38). The
various problems of each method are obvious, and Boorse carefully
examines and rejects each one. They all share one noteworthy feature.
Each theory defines and treats mental disease symptomatically rather
than causally. This practice constitutes a rejection of a significant aspect
of the physiological model. Thus mental health theory (and practice)
remains in a state similar to that of physiological medicine before the
development of the germ theory.
Boorse notes that the poor progress in mental health theory and
practice is best explained by its reliance on early physiological medicine
(which lacked the causal germ theory). Even as physiological medi
cine matured, its lack of an explicit theory made the model of disease
causation less available to mental health theory (41). However, by hav
ing shown that the mental is both autonomous and causal, Boorse
hopes to have shown that mental health is capable of fully adopting the
physiological paradigm. Only the determination of a correct theory of
mind, itself a formidable task, remains. Boorse recommends psychoana
lytic theory (though not psychoanalytic practice) as the best model of
mind that we have (42-43).
Davidson's Principle of the Anomalism of the Mental
Boorse's project, though obviously desirable, cannot be main
tained in light of the very Davidsonian principles from which he draws
support. He appeals to Davidson for two key points: establishing men
tal causation, and overcoming the charge of Cartesian dualism (thus
6 D AVID A. JENSEN
establishing the independence of the mental). By establishing these two
principles, he can argue that certain mental states cause mental disease.
Then, by discovering these "bad" mental states (as with discovering a
germ, or a bad gene in physiological medicine), one would have identi
fied the causal agent of the mental disease. Knowing the causal agent,
one could attempt a "cure." The implications of Boorse's appeals to
Davidson, however, effectively render his project impossible.
In Davidson's influential paper "Mental Events," he explains his
position which makes compatible three otherwise seemingly contra
dictory propositions. These propositions are as follows. First, mental
events interact with physical events (the principle of causal interac
tion). Second, events are related causally under strict deterministic laws
(the principle of the nomological character of causality). Third, there
are no strict deterministic laws on the basis of which mental events
can be predicted and explained (the principle of the anomalism of the
mental)( 208). The three principles appear contradictory, then, because
if mental events are causal, and all causation is related by a law, then
there are mental laws. Principle three explicitly rejects this.
Davidson's argument which allows these propositions to obtain
without contradiction is a version of the identity theory he names
"anomalous monism." Davidson agrees with materialists that all mental
events are, ontologically, physical events (hence "monism"). However,
he disagrees that mental events can be correlated with their physi
cal counterparts on a type-to-type basis (hence "anomalous"). Brian
McLaughlin explains this by saying that "such mental-physical token
identities do not imply mental-physical type-type identities since event
tokens can fall under many types" (335).' Hence, no physical predi
cate can be coextensive with a mental predicate. Although descriptions of
events instantiate a law, the same is not true of singular statements
of causal events (215).
Given anomalous monism, the anomalism of the mental does not
contradict the other two principles. Because the mental is too complex
to be reduced to the physical, it is also too complex (for a variety of
'Brian McLaughlin's essay "Anomalous Monism and the Irreducibility of
the Mental" is very helpful as an aid to better understanding Davidson's paper
"Mental Events" and his position regarding anomalous monism.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 7
reasons) to be reduced to laws. Regarding this latter principle, Davidson
states, "There may he true general statements relating the mental and
the physical, statements that have the logical form of a law; hut they
are not lawlike (in a strong sense . . . )" (216). He thus distinguishes
between what he calls homonomic laws and heteronomic laws. Homo-
nomic laws are generalizations which give us reason to believe that the
generalization could he improved upon with further conditions added.
Heteronomic laws, however, are generalizations which give us reason to
believe there is a precise law at work, hut such a law could only he spec
ified in a different vocabulary (219). Davidson limits psychology (and
the social sciences or any science dealing with prepositional attitudes)
to heteronomic laws.
Before returning to Boorse, 1 shall examine some of the arguments
in Davidson's influential paper "Psychology as Philosophy," in which
he elaborates and defends more fully the implications of anomalous
monism. Intentional behavior cannot he explained or predicted in the
same manner as other phenomena because of the holistic nature of
the mental (230). Davidson states: "When we attribute a belief, desire,
goal, intention or meaning to an agent, we necessarily operare within a
system of concepts in part determined by the structure of the beliefs
and desires of the agent himself" (230). Thus, the more we wish to
increase the accuracy (lawlikeness) of a theory of behavior, the more
we must bring into account a person's beliefs, motives, desires, and
so forth. But in doing this, we necessarily impose conditions of coher
ence and rationality in order to understand the person in the first place.
Because we must to a degree arbitrarily impose ever increasing con
ditions of coherence and rationality, we forfeit the increased accuracy
we seek.
Davidson argues that we can never give necessary and sufficient
conditions to explain intentional actions using only belief, desire,
and cause (232). Because we can never (granted the holistic nature of
the mental) give an account of how decisions are reached in lighr
of conflicting evidence, beliefs, desires (and all other sorts of inten
tional attitudes and behavior), we cannot make psychological laws
(232). Explanation by reason is useful. It allows us to single out a cause
which explains behavior. However, it also limits the formation of any
strict laws. Hence Davidson concludes: "The limit placed on the social
sciences is set not by nature, hut by us when we decide to view men
8 D AVID A. JENSEN
as rational agents with goals and purposes, and as subject to moral
evaluation" (239).®
Returning to Boorse, how do Davidson's arguments frustrate the
former's project? Davidson is concerned with the sciences and the social
sciences. Boorse's discussion is concerned with physiological medicine
and mental medicine. However, physiology draws upon features of the
sciences, most notably in this discussion, the notion of causation. A
theory of mental health, based on physiology, as Boorse advocates, then,
would have to have this same notion of causality. Boorse does not object
to this, but hinges his theory on it. But, following Davidson, causation
in the mental cannot be generalized into strict laws. Because Boorse
appeals to Davidson for his notions of mental causation and mental
autonomy, he can hardly reject this conclusion lightly.
Because there cannot be strict laws, Boorse's project is doomed. It
is impossible, in his envisioned autonomous and causal mental realm, to
say that mental state x will cause mental disease y. Unfortunately, with
out such laws, treatment and identification of a mental disease based on
its cause, based on the causal physiological model, is impossible. For
example, we know what reaction various bacteria will cause in a human.
Hence, once symptoms are linked with the bacteria, or the specific bac
teria is in some way identified, treatment can begin.' In contrast, we
**1 do not wish to simplify Davidson's arguments. There are more argu
ments at work here, but 1 am able to review only some of them.
'One might argue that often we do not know the effect a "germ" will have
on the body; it may react differently in different people. This is not, however, a
problem with Davidson's argument as applied to this situation. The argument
merely holds that genetalizations of the physical realm can be further specified,
while those generalizations of the mental/intentional tealm cannot be further
specified, or at least they will teach an a priori limit. Thus, though in many cases
we operate with "laws" in physiology which are merely generalizations, there is
at least reason to believe that these laws can be made more specific. Professor
K. Codell Carter has also brought to my attention the fact that bacteria, as in
this example, are only necessary causes of disease, but not sufficient. In light
of this my example is to a degree inaccurate. Nevertheless, in the treatment of
a disease it is the case that one would want to eliminate a necessary cause,
though there be other conditions which must obtain. Thus the example still
illustrates the essential point of treating disease from a causal standpoint.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 9
cannot say (at least not in the way physiology does) how a person will
react to belief x or desire y and so forth. It seems impossible to link symp
toms of mental disease to certain mental states since there are no laws
governing mental states. That is, different people often react differently
to the same belief or desire. Of course, if we could understand all the
beliefs, desires, and other intentional attitudes influencing a person,
then perhaps we could predict and explain behavior (in a lawlike fash
ion). But it is the very impossibility of the former that creates the
problem in the first place. Although the examples 1 have offered are
simple, I think a more complicated example (given that the argument
rests on the holism of the mental) would serve only to prove the point
more cogently.'"
Criticism of the Anomalism of the Mental
Using the notion of ceteris paribus ("all things being equal or con
stant"), Robert Klee argues that if the anomalism of the mental holds,
then not only are there no psychological laws, but also no physical
laws. Since there clearly are physical laws, he asserts, then Davidson's
anomalism of the mental cannot be correct. Klee restates Davidson's argu
ment according to his own terminology and I think it is essentially
compatible with Davidson's (393-94). Though he makes minor criti
cisms in laying out his argument, I will address only his main criticism
via ceteris paribus.
Klee notes that Davidson's argument against psychological laws
follows from the holistic nature of the mental and the subsequent need
to maximize rationality (396). Davidson's position, Klee argues, assumes
that there is a categorical difference in the operation of ceteris paribus
clauses in the physical domain and the need to maximize rationality in
the mental (intentional) realm (392). Klee translates ceteris paribus as
"all things being equal" and cites Lakatos for support that ceteris paribus
'"Davidson does note briefly, in his replies to "Psychology as Philosophy,"
that he does not intend an attack on psychology, though his position may so
appear. However, as Alexander Rosenberg points out in his essay "Davidson's
Unintended Attack on Psychology," intended or not, Davidson's position
severely limits the claims psychology can make.
10 DAVID A. JENSEN
is more the rule than the exception in scientific inference (397). Klee
states that
ceteris paribus clauses thus allow one to fix background states and
conditions so as to rule out theoretically irrelevant factors:
factors which either lack a sufficiently direct causal connection
to the foreground state, or else have a direct causal connection to
the foreground state but one which is of no theoretical interest
to us. (397-98)
Then Klee asks, "Is not maximizing rationality in the organism's behav
ior basically a means of minimizing interference by theoretically
irrelevant causal factors in the total behavior of the organism?" (398).
Thus, Klee argues that maximizing rationality and minimizing irrel
evant interference are the same, that there is no categorical difference
between the two.
Klee uses the following "classical experiment" as a case example.
Biochemical secretions known as interferons have the ability to kill
viruses (398). We attribute to these interferons, he notes, lawlike capa
city." Mice which have been injected with an interferon suppressant die
from several hundred times less viruses than are normally needed to kill
mice not injected with the interferon suppressant. Klee notes that this is
a clear case of ceteris paribus at work because other things must be
assumed as being "i nactive or irrelevant in causing the observed capacity
to kill viruses" (399)." In other words, if the drug that inactivates the
"It is not clear that one would want to call the causal relations in physi
ology "laws," or "lawlike" as Klee does. In fact, the laws that Davidson is con
cerned with in "Mental Events" seem to be only the laws of physics—strict
quantitative laws (see McLaughlin 342—48). This may thus constitute a first
objection to Klee's use of this example. But, as Klee wants to talk about "laws"
in physiology, and relate this to Davidson's laws, 1 will go ahead, assuming
that the more formal and quantitative laws of Davidson have some connection
to the "laws" of Klee.
"The nature of ceteris paribus laws is itself an issue of debate. Klee recog
nizes this. Thus, although 1 do realize that ceteris paribus could be formulated
differently, 1 am using Klee's definitions here.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 11
interferons also causes a deadly allergic reaction in the mice, then this
would already make them more susceptible to the virus in the first place.
Or, as Klee notes, it must be assumed that the capacity of interferons to
kill viruses does not turn on and off (399). Otherwise, it may simply be
that the interferons belonging to the group injected with the supposed
suppressant had simply shut off at that time. Klee concludes;
just as the attribution of a psychological state is tremendously
sensitive to a plethora of background beliefs and desires, so the
attribution of an immunological state is tremendously sensitive
to a plethora of background states involving millions of other
effector cells, soluble molecular factors, and genetically controlled
regulatory mechanisms.( 400)
Interestingly, Klee's argument relates especially to this discussion
inasmuch as he applies ceteris paribus to an issue in physiology. We might
say, to restate and apply his argument, that if we cannot make laws
of mental causation for mental disease, then we cannot make laws of
physical causation for physiological disease. But, since we do attribute
physiological disease to specific causes (germs, bad genes, and so forth)
we must he capable of fixing psychological laws. His argument fol
lows, at this level, and as he states, from a simple modus tollens (402),
and would serve to eliminate my argument (from Davidson) against
Boorse's project.
Klee's argument, however, presents at least two problems: a
degree of circularity, and a misunderstanding of Davidson. I shall first
address his circularity. First of all, he argues that ceteris paribus (hereafter
CP) is the equivalent of Davidson's thesis of the holism of the mental
and the ensuing necessity to maximize rationality. Already this seems to
be an oversimplification of Davidson's position, and one that I do not
think follows. However, in order to continue with Klee's argument I will
allow it; that is, I will allow CP to be equated to maximizing rationality
(in the mental realm) and thus to be the feature that prevents psycho
logical laws.
Klee thus makes the following assertions:
(1) if X (for example, a belief that causes an action) belongs to
the intentional realm, then x relies on CP for prediction and
explanation.
12 DAVID A. JENSEN
(2) If X (for example, a physical phenomenon) belongs to the
physical realm, then x relies on CP for prediction and explanation.
(3) If X belongs to the intentional realm and x relies on CP, then
we can make no strict laws predicting and explaining x.
(4) If X belongs to the physical realm and x relies on CP, then we
can make no laws predicting and explaining x.
(5) X can belong to the physical realm, rely on CP, and we can
make strict laws predicting and explaining x.
What I have stated above is Klee's argument (see 401-02 for his layout
of it). Obviously, there are some unstated assumptions. But consider first
the justifications for each.( 1) is justified by Davidson's thesis about the
holism of the mental and the necessity of CP (= maximizing ration
ality) in explaining and predicting intentional events. (2) follows from
Klee's appeal to Lakatos. (3) follows from Davidson's principle of the
anomalism of the mental.( 4) is what Klee wants to argue is implied by
(3). (5), which appears obviously correct to Klee, rejects both (4) and,
according to Klee, (3). However, how is it that one can move from (3)
to (4), and then reject (3) based on (5)? This can be done only with the
addition of this premise:
(11) CP's function and effect in the intentional realm = CP's func
tion and effect in the physical realm.
It is this claim that I shall dispute in my second criticism of Klee. And
this claim seems to imply, or assume, a second identity, that is:
(12) the function and effect of features in the intentional realm =
the function and effect of features in the physical realm.
The second identity is more doubtful, and implies further that the
two realms are the same. But the first assumption (II) at least completes
the argument that Klee makes above, that is, it allows the inference
from (3) to (4). The problem with circularity enters in (5). The circu
larity is quite simple: the question at issue is the nature of laws in both
the intentional and physical realms. For Klee to make his appeal, as he
does in (5), that there are laws in the physical realm begs the question.
He has already insisted that the generalizations or "laws" formed by CP
in the mental (intentional) in no way differ from the "generalizations"
or laws formed in the physical. If this is so, then why should one accept
Klee's presumption that, because they are called "laws" in the physical,
they should be called laws in the intentional? Why not instead move
in the opposite direction and conclude that since we know that the
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 13
mental only has generalizations and that the mental equates to the
physical, then the physical has only generalizations? 1 am not arguing,
and 1 do not think Davidson is arguing (or would argue), that such a
move should be made. But by equating the two realms and then appeal
ing to an intuitive notion of laws in the physical, when the nature of
those laws is just what is at issue, Klee gives no reason for concluding as
he does. And thus as he draws the conclusion, he begs the question.'^
Klee's equating the effect of CP in the physical with the effect of
CP in the intentional (ll) brings about the next criticism. Though sci
entific inference, as with intentional speech and behavior, may have a
host of background stuff, the nature of this background is different. Klee
states, as I have noted earlier, that ceteris paribus "clauses fix background
initial conditions in order to rule out theoretically irrelevant causal
factor" (401, italics added). Though this may be the solution in scien
tific inference, at least as Klee has argued, it is the very problem in
intentional interpretation. When we fix conditions, we rule out causal
factors that are relevant! Davidson's very point (which Klee seems to
miss) is that although the physical can rule out background factors as
"Davidson starts and concludes "Mental Events" by quoting lengthily
from Kant's Groundwork. He quotes Kant as stating that because there must
he freedom on the one hand, and determinism in the physical world on the
other, we must somehow reconcile the two, hut without reducing one to
the other. This is essentially Davidson's project, to keep the mental and the
physical vocabularies separate. As such, Davidson will allow laws in the phys
ical realm, hut not in the mental. And, as Davidson describes the mental, it
generates only generalizations. Thus, when Klee argues that the physical oper
ates just as the mental, then one is first of all inclined to think that this implies
that there are no laws in the physical, only generalizations. Yet Klee wants to go
in the other direction. But to go the other direction he must assume a strict
notion of laws in the physical, and it is far from clear, as he has argued, that
there are such laws when he has stated that ceteris paribus indeterminacy is the
rule in the physical realm. Thus, his appeal to the physical laws that "we all
know really exist" not only begs the question, hut is unjustified next to the free
dom of the mental realm that "we all know really exists." This is not a problem
for Davidson, or Kant, since they keep the two vocabularies separate.
"See footnote 12.
14 DAVID A. JENSEN
irrelevant, the intentional cannot because the background factors are
necessarily relevant. This is the whole point of Davidson's thesis as to
the holism of the mental; beliefs, desires, and so forth are holistically
related, and so they cannot be counted as irrelevant, or noninterfering.
Klee is right, in a sense, that imposing rationality on a person in order
to interpret speech and behavior is somewhat like CP. But whereas CP,
in scientific inference, truly can rule out factors which are irrelevant, at
least according to Klee, imposing rationality must overlook factors
which are potentially very relevant. Thus a limit is placed on the for
mation of psychological laws. Thus Klee's criticism fails.
Emphasizing the same point, in his essay "P aradoxes of Irration
ality" Davidson notes that only by imposing coherence and rationality
can we understand another's beliefs, desires, and other propositional
attitudes (302). However, Davidson notes, people often act irrationally.
Although imposing inconsistency leads to unintelligibility, we must
allow enough inconsistency in order to explain irrational behavior
(303). In contrast to "all things being equal," imposing rationality is, as
Davidson notes, "a matter of degree" (303). Davidson states:
The underlying paradox of irrationality is this: if we explain it too
well, we tum it into a concealed form of rationality; while, if we
assign it incoherence too glihly, we merely compromise our ability
to diagnose irrationality by withdrawing the background of ratio
nality needed to justify any diagnosis at all. (303)
The example of irrationality demonstrates the difficulty of interpreting
intentional behavior, and the ensuing impossibility of strict psychologi
cal laws. Hence, the imposing of rationality for the interpretation of
speech and behavior, contrary to what Klee believes, is not simply a
form of ceteris paribus.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I have argued that Boorse's project, which draws on
Davidsonian principles for crucial support, is also limited by the impli
cations of those very principles. The holism of the mental, as I have
argued against Klee, is sufficiently different from the physical (at least as
Klee describes it) sucb that it inhibits the establishment of strict laws.
WHAT A THEORY OF MENTAL HEALTH SHOULD BE 15
Although Boorse's project cannot achieve its aim of modeling mental
health after physiology, such a direction (for mental health) may never
theless be more effective then the current models of mental health
(which he rejects). Thus in some respects, his project still seems like a
promising direction to take mental health theory, though our expecta
tions for such a project, as now constituted, must be severely limited.
In other respects, the requirement of rationality, in order to explain
behavior, seems difficult to reconcile with the depth of mental illness
and irrationality that mental health care often seems to encounter.
Works Cited
Boorse, Christopher." On the Distinction between Disease and Illness."
Phibsophy and Public Affairs 5.1 (1975): 49-68.
." What a Theory of Mental Health Should Be." Psychiatry and
Ethics. Ed. Rem. B. Edwards. Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1976.
29-48.
Davidson, Donald. "Actions, Reasons and Causes." Essays on Actions
and Events. Oxford: Clarendon P, 1980. 3-19.
. " Mental Events." Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford:
Clarendon P, 1980. 207-27.
. "Paradoxes of Irrationality." Phibsophical Essays on Freud. Ed.
Richard Wollheim and John Hopkins. Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
1982. 289-305.
. " Psychology as Philosophy." Essays on Actions and Events.
Oxford: Clarendon P, 1980. 229-44.
Klee, Robert. "Anomalous Monism, Ceteris Paribus and Psychological
Explanation." British Journal of the Phibsophy of Science 43 (1992):
389-403.
McLaughlin, Brian P. "Anomalous Monism and the Irreducibility of the
Mental." Actions and Events: Perspectives on the Phibsophy of
Donald Davidson. Ed. Ernest LePore and Brian P. McLaughlin.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1985. 331-65.
Rosenberg, Alexander. "Davidson's Unintended Attack on
Psychology." Actions and Events; Perspectives on the Phibsophy of
Donald Davidson. Ed. Ernest LePore and Brian P. McLaughlin.
Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1985. 399-407.