Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
Indirect Discourse: Parataxis, the Propositional
Function Modification, and “That”
Michael alan Johnson
In “On Saying That,” Donald Davidson offered an analysis of indirect
discourse that was meant to overcome the classic difficulties of a seman-
tic theory of indirect discourse. Additionally, Davidson’s treatment
of indirect discourse was purported to further his project of explaining
meaning in a purely extensional, explicitly truth-defined, and composi-
tional manner. The particular paratactic theory that Davidson introduced
to accomplish his purposes has been influential and widely debated ever
since 1968.
Many criticisms of Davidson’s theory have attacked the idea that
the object to which indirect discourse report-clauses1 refer is an utterance.
However, recent attempts to salvage the paratactic theory—most notably
by Gary Kemp—have tried to retain the paratactic logical form and the
distinctive character of the Davidsonian theory in face of these objections
by offering alternative accounts of what it is that indirect discourse report-
clauses refer to. In this paper I will argue that Kemp’s account fails to offer
a suitable replacement for the role of the “utterance” in Davidson’s theory.
Moreover, in addition to critiquing Kemp specifically, I will show that
Kemp’s strategy of modifying this one particular aspect of Davidson’s
paratactic theory is inadequate to salvage the plausibility of Davidson’s the-
ory, even if Kemp’s modifications were successful.
1 See footnote 6 for information on my use of the terms report-clause, report-sentence, content-clause,
and content-sentence.
Michael Alan Johnson has recently finished undergraduate work, earning a B.A.
(Honors) in philosophy and history. He will soon be applying to do graduate work in
philosophy and hopes to work in the areas of philosophy of language and philosophy
of mind.
10 Michael alan Johnson
In section 1, I will briefly introduce the problem of substitutability in
indirect discourse and present Davidson’s paratactic theory as a response
to it. I will then (section 2) mention a critique, known as the ambiguity
problem, that has been leveled against Davidson’s paratactic theory. This
critique targets the role Davidson assigns to utterances in the paratactic
theory. Section 3 will be dedicated to Kemp’s modified paratactic theory
and will include an overview of his essential arguments that contend
that his modified paratactic theory defends against the ambiguity prob-
lem. This will be followed by my objections to Kemp’s modifications and
by a new formulation of the ambiguity problem. The final section (sec-
tion 4) will introduce arguments against the plausibility of the paratactic
theory generally. I will conclude by arguing that, even if it were possible to
formulate a paratactic theory of indirect discourse that avoids “utterance
objections” (like the ambiguity problem), there are yet more damaging and
basic problems to be addressed.
1
Donald Davidson’s treatment of indirect discourse in “On Saying
That” is greatly motivated by his larger aims in the philosophy of language.
As a part of these aims, Davidson argues that a successful account of a
given language would extensionally define the truth-conditions of that lan-
guage’s finite vocabulary and determine the rules for composition of terms
(and their corresponding truth-conditions). Davidson thinks that if these
requirements were met for a given language, then one would have all of the
resources one needs to compositionally understand an infinite number of
statements within that language.
Indirect discourse reports present a particularly difficult challenge to
Davidson’s aims, as the ordinary rules for semantics of a term sometimes
fail within the scope of an indirect discourse report. For example, ordi-
narily, co-extensive—or at least co-referential—terms are substitutable salva
veritate. “Hesperus is highly volcanic,” remains true even if “Phosphorus”
replaces “Hesperus.” This substitutability is made possible by the two
terms’ semantic properties. However, while “Hesperus” and “Phosphorus”
are substitutable salva veritate in ordinary circumstances, they are not clearly
substitutable salva veritate within the scope of an indirect discourse report.
Consider, “Attila said that Hesperus is his favorite celestial object.”2 In this
example, it is not clear that “Phosphorus” is substitutable for “Hesperus”
2 This problem is, of course, not unique to oratio obliqua, but is well-known and much discussed
among philosophers dealing with the issue of propositional attitudes generally. Gottlob Frege’s
“Sense and Reference” (originally published in 1892) is an early attempt to handle this issue.
indirect discourse 11
without altering the truth-conditions or even the truth-value of the entire
indirect discourse report. Davidson’s 1968 article is an attempt to respond
to the substitutability problem and to shed light on the nature of indirect
discourse.
The paratactic theory is an attempt to make clear the logical form of
indirect discourse reports and to thereby surmount the problems of aber-
rant semantic behavior within the context of indirect discourse. Davidson
advances the idea that the key to understanding indirect discourse lies in
seeing that the actual logical form of a standard indirect discourse report
involves two separate sentences, related to each other only by a demonstra-
tive. According to Davidson, the first of these sentences is the report of
an action, namely, a person x having said something. This first sentence
amounts to “an expression referring to a speaker, the two-place predicate
‘said,’ and a demonstrative referring to an utterance” (142). The second
sentence is a specific utterance purported to match the content of what
it is that P said, and it is denoted by the demonstrative “that” of the first
sentence. The utterance referred to by “that” is said to have samesaid what it
is being used to report if and only if it is true that it “match[es] in content”
the utterance it is being used to report (143).
According to Davidson, the two sentences making up an indirect
discourse report are semantically and logically independent of each other.
However, the sentences retain a relationship in that the first sentence refers
to the second by means of the demonstrative “that.”
Let’s see how this plays out using Davidson’s original example.
(1) Galileo said that the earth moves.
becomes
(2) Galileo said that.
The earth moves.
By using “that” as a demonstrative connecting two distinct sentences, as
well as by taking some “tiny orthographic” liberties,3 Davidson is able to
make an intuitively plausible case that the logical form of indirect discourse
reports is composed of two semantically innocent sentences (142).
Davidson thinks that neither of the two sentences requires that their
constituent terms sacrifice their usual semantic properties for being within
the scope of a “that” clause. This innocence can be attained because the
content-clause “the earth moves” is not embedded in the speech-report
clause “Galileo said that;” both clauses are semantically independent of
3 Namely, we take the liberty of ignoring punctuation and clause-order when dealing with the logi-
cal form of indirect discourse reports.
12 Michael alan Johnson
the other. The clause “Galileo said that” bears the logical form of a self-suffi-
cient sentence and declares Galileo’s having said something. Furthermore,
it indicates that what Galileo said will be indicated by the utterance follow-
ing. The utterance following also bears the logical form of a lone sentence.
It is a self-sufficient utterance made in a standard logical context that has
been announced as conveying the content of what Galileo said.
If Davidson is correct regarding the logical form of indirect dis-
course reports, and if what appears to be a single complex sentence is
actually two sentences, then there is a simple and intuitive way out of the
apparent problems of analyzing indirect discourse. First, the general seman-
tics of indirect discourse are no longer mysterious or aberrant. If we are
not led astray by the single-sentence surface-form of the indirect discourse
report, what we will find are two sentences that afford standard semantic
evaluation. Therefore, indirect discourse is not semantically problematic.
Second, the apparent problem of substitutability can be solved. The issue
stems from considering an indirect discourse report as a single sentence
that has its own truth conditions—a circumstance in which substitution
of like terms should not alter the truth of the sentence. If the phenom-
enon of truth-change, subsequent to a substitution, is viewed from the
perspective that the indirect discourse report is logically singular, one must
conclude that indirect discourse contexts are semantically deviant in not
allowing for extensional substitutions. But Davidson’s proposal escapes
this trap.
How is it that the basis of the semantic problem of substitutabil-
ity dissolves when the Davidsonian two-sentence logical form is applied?
Under Davidson’s two-sentence analysis, neither the content-sentence nor
the report-sentence undergoes changes in truth when an extensional substi-
tution is performed. However, a substitution in one sentence may affect the
truth of the other. A substitution salva veritate in the content-sentence would
change the utterance that is referred to by “that” in the report-sentence and
thereby might alter the truth of the report-sentence. This change of truth-
value in the sentence not undergoing substitution suffices to explain why
a one-sentence analysis of indirect discourse would be unable to account
for the change in truth-conditions of the greater indirect discourse report
and the apparent semantic deviance of indirect discourse reports. Albeit,
the changes of truth-value are not aberrant or mysterious so long as one
recognizes two semantically innocent sentences: a content -sentence that
undergoes an extensional substitution salva veritate and another sentence
that may change in truth because its referent (the uttering of the content-
sentence) has been altered.
indirect discourse 13
2
One argument that has been insistently leveled against Davidson’s
paratactic theory is based on instances of ambiguity in indirect discourse.
This ambiguity problem has been articulated by Rumfitt and Frankish,
among others, and is one of the major problems against which Kemp
attempts to defend the paratactic theory. Kemp goes so far as to say that
the ambiguity problem is serious enough that it shows Davidson’s original
paratactic theory to be unsound. In order to explore the problem, let’s take
a case of ambiguous indirect discourse reporting, as in (3).4
(3) John said that someone heard the shooting of
the hunters.
The content-clause of (3), “someone heard the shooting of the hunt-
ers,” is syntactically ambiguous between two distinct interpretations. On
the one hand hunters may be getting shot, or on the other hand the hunt-
ers may be shooting. Davidson’s construal of (3) looks like this:
(3') (a) John said that.
(b) Someone heard the shooting of the hunters.5
Or:
(3'') samesaid (x, that). u.
where x stands for a speaker, u is an utterance, “that” denotes the utterance
u, and “samesaid” is a two-place predicate indicating that what x said bore
the same content as the utterance u. Now, we have noted that in the case of
(3), the utterance “Someone heard the shooting of the hunters” is ambigu-
ous and thus does not have a determined content. Although the utterance
(b) may have two distinct meanings or interpretations, it does not convey
the content of either of its interpretations as it stands. So, how does this
relate to Davidson’s theory?
The function of (a) in Davidson’s theory is to singularly designate an
utterance (b) as bearing the content of what John said. But if it cannot
4 (3) is the example used by both Rumfitt and Frankish.
5 (a) is an instance of what I will refer to as a report-sentence. (b) is a content-sentence. Use of either
of the “-sentence” terms will be indicative of a paratactic theory of indirect discourse since the
paratactic theory stipulates that surface grammar report-clauses and content-clauses should be
analyzed as sentential paratactic pairs, e.g. (3'). I will use the terms report-clause and content-clause
to refer to parts of a surface analysis or to nonparatactic analysis of a single-sentence indirect dis-
course report, such as (3). I will use report-clause to refer to everything preceding and including the
word “that” in (3) and content-clause to refer to everything after “that.” This rule will apply in all
cases of indirect discourse that bear the form of (3).
14 Michael alan Johnson
identify a content-bearing utterance, then there is no object which could
have a samesaying relation with any other, as samesaying consists of two
utterances expressing the same content. Moreover, the very logical form
of (a) necessitates that for it to be meaningful, that is, to do the work of a
report-clause, it must designate an utterance which affords clear content to
be used in a samesaying relation, as this is precisely what Davidson takes
“said that” to mean. However, being an ambiguous utterance, (b) does not
bear distinct content.
The problem is that, though it is unknown which of the two inter-
pretations of the utterance (b) is being attributed to John, in Davidson’s
theory (a) must still operate according to the form that it unequivocally
attributes to John the content of utterance (b). If (b) is ambiguous, then
no content can be unequivocally attributed to John, and the whole logical
machine by which Davidson takes indirect discourse report-clauses to work
breaks down. Even beyond the ambiguity issue, it is unclear that “John said
that” can mean anything under Davidson’s treatment. “John said that” can-
not be any sort of attribution of samesaying, as nothing that qualifies for
the samesaying relation is truly picked out by “that.”
In Davidson’s theory, we are then left with the unacceptable con-
sequence that (a) and other report-clauses become unintelligible in the
context of their referring to an ambiguous utterance. In response to this,
we must either bite the bullet and settle for the fact that Davidson’s the-
ory makes the meaning of report-clauses indeterminable in the context of
ambiguous reports, or we must modify the theory.
There is little choice here: it is absolutely clear what “John said that”
means, regardless of whether or not it is followed by an ambiguous utter-
ance, and the logical form we assign to the report-clause must account
for this fact. We must therefore conclude that Davidson’s ideas regarding
indirect discourse should be modified so that the logical form of ambigu-
ous speech reports such as (3) do not make the report-clauses of indirect
discourse reports unintelligible.
3
Kemp’s paper offers a modification of Davidson’s paratactic theory
that is purported to avoid the ambiguity problem as well as other objections.
Kemp’s strategy for his revised variant of the paratactic theory is to fill, with
propositions, the role that utterances played in Davidson’s original theory.
By changing the entity referred to by the report-clause of indirect discourse,
Kemp hopes to avoid the problems (such as the ambiguity problem) that
are linked to the characteristics of utterances.
indirect discourse 15
Kemp defends at length the idea that a Davidsonian approach to the
philosophy of language may allow for the use of some form of propositions,
if only for use in a limited capacity as a metalinguistic explanatory device
sans ontological commitments.6 Kemp’s new, proposition-charged paratac-
tic theory (what I will hereafter call the prop-function theory) is expressly
designed to overcome major difficulties plaguing the role of utterances in
Davidson’s original theory. For example, Kemp uses his prop-function the-
ory as a response to Schiffer’s well-known arguments for the untenability
of extending the paratactic theory from indirect discourse to proposi-
tional attitude reports generally, and for the infamous “counting problem.”
Of course, Kemp also hopes to avoid the ambiguity problem.
Kemp’s solution to the ambiguity problem is to get rid of Davidson’s
logical explanation of the function of “that”—according to which “that”
refers to a single and fixed occasion of an utterance. This was how Davidson
provided the content of an indirect discourse attribution. Kemp notes (as
we did above) that Davidson’s analysis of report-clauses as report-sentences
is sure to misfire in cases where “that” refers to a clear and fixed utterance
that is not clear and fixed in its content.
Instead, Kemp advocates that we permit “a function from a context
of utterance to a proposition,” which would thereby allow us to replace
the old target content of indirect discourse (utterances) with utterances
expressing propositions (139). Kemp’s prop-function theory variant of (1)
would have this form:
(4) SAID (Galileo, the proposition expressed by
that). The earth moves.
In (4), the two-place predicate “SAID” obtains between a speaker and a
proposition y if the speaker made an utterance that expresses y.7
The prop-function theory retains most of the advantages of
Davidson’s original paratactic theory, while simultaneously responding to
a number of problems. Kemp’s theory is particularly suitable for extending
the paratactic theory to all manner of propositional attitude reports, as
it offers more “appropriate” objects (propositions) for the wide range of
propositional attitudes.
6 Kemp finds it acceptable to invoke the concept of a proposition in just the same cases where
Davidson invokes synonymy: “so long as we do so only within the particular lexical region of
the metalanguage used to interpret a certain species of object-language utterance, and not as ‘the
foundation of a theory of language’” (Kemp 149).
7 Kemp understands his propositions to require only the concept of synonymy that Davidson
already utilizes, so our rule for propositions is that any two utterances express the same proposition
if and only if they are synonymous.
16 Michael alan Johnson
Kemp’s theory also seems to help with the classic ambiguity problem.
If taken in terms of Kemp’s theory, (3) would be represented thus:
(5) SAID (John, the proposition expressed by that).
Someone heard the shooting of the hunters.
Kemp’s general form for indirect discourse can be represented as: SAID
(speaker, the proposition expressed by u). u. In light of this, Kemp’s claim
is that (5) avoids the ambiguity problem because “if u is ambiguous then
so is the singular term ‘the proposition expressed by u’” (140).
Kemp’s prop-function theory escapes the Davidsonian ambiguity
problem because “that” in (5) could be referring to one of two things, spe-
cifically, one of the two propositions that could be expressed by “Someone
heard the shooting of the hunters.” This analysis seems to lead to an intui-
tively correct understanding of (3). The report-clause does its job: John
has been reported as saying something. Though what exactly he said is
unclear, because the content-clause of (3) is ambiguous, the report-clause
can successfully cope with this by allowing the object of the demonstrative
“that” to share the ambiguity of the content-clause, instead of requiring,
as Davidson’s theory does, that “that” pick out the ambiguous utterance as
conveying the unambiguous content of what John is saying. This seems to
be quite agreeable.
That being said, Kemp’s version of the paratactic theory fails to
adequately handle a variation of the ambiguity problem which I will now
introduce. Let’s take a situation in which two acquaintances, say Attila and
Jannai, are having a conversation. The conversation turns out to be quite
one-sided, with Attila doing most of the talking. Jannai begins to lose
focus on what Attila is talking about and instead tries to bring to mind the
things he hopes to accomplish that week. Jannai soon regains his focus and
tunes back into the conversation only to hear Attila somewhat inexplicably
say this:
(6) Someone heard the shooting of the hunters.
The context of the conversation does not help in clarifying what Attila
meant by (6), and because Jannai is in a hurry and knows of Attila’s ten-
dency to prate, Jannai does not ask Attila to disambiguate what was said.
With that, the conversation ends. Now, consider Jannai’s prospects for
using a standard-form indirect discourse report to inform someone of
Attila’s having said (6).
According to Kemp’s prop-function analysis of paratactic theory, if
Jannai were to tell someone the story of his interaction with Attila, and had
indirect discourse 17
to relay the occurrence of Attila’s saying (6), then the form of such indirect
discourse would look like (7):
(7) SAID (Attila, the proposition expressed by that.)
Someone heard the shooting of the hunters.
Assuming that Jannai were to say
Attila said that someone heard the shooting of
the hunters.
In (7), as in (5), the “that” of “Attila said that” would be ambiguous as to
which of two propositions it denotes, and the report-clause of which “that”
is a constituent would successfully report that Attila had said something
that expresses one of the two propositions conveyed by the following:
Someone heard the hunters being shot.
Someone heard the hunters shooting.
But this clearly gives us the wrong result. In ordinary communication,
Jannai is not reporting ambiguously in the case of (7), he is in fact report-
ing the exact character of what Attila said. In this case, “that” should not
refer to one of the two propositions possibly expressed by “someone heard
the shooting of the hunters,” but instead it should refer to the ambiguous
utterance “someone heard the shooting of the hunters” itself. Therefore,
the use of “that” in (7) should not be ambiguous between two referents as
it must be in order to respond to the classic ambiguity problem.
The report-sentence of (7) must refer to “someone heard the shoot-
ing of the hunters” as what Attila said. However, the prop-function theory
does not allow for this report because its analysis of (7) stipulates that if
“that” refers to an ambiguous utterance, then “that” is ambiguous, refer-
ring to one or the other of the propositions expressed by “someone heard the
shooting of the hunters.” Because of this, Kemp’s theory cannot account
for cases of indirect discourse in which an ambiguous utterance is deliberately
attributed to a speaker, even though Kemp’s theory is helpful with classic
cases in which someone reports ambiguously something that they intended
to convey unambiguously.
It may be objected that reporting instances of ambiguity such as (7)
should fall into the domain of quotation’s responsibilities. That is to say, if
Jannai cares to relate to someone else what Attila said, Jannai should say
something like the following:
Attila said, and I quote, “Someone heard the shoot-
ing of the hunters.”
18 Michael alan Johnson
This would certainly do the trick. However, it does not seem that the
logical form of indirect discourse should have to confine a speaker to
the quotation strategy shown above. If an unacceptable consequence of the
original Davidsonian theory is that it cannot successfully deal with fairly
normal cases of ambiguity in indirect discourse, then this is unacceptable
for Kemp’s theory as well.
After all, one can imagine a situation in which it is perfectly clear
that Jannai means to attribute the utterance “Someone heard the shooting
of the hunters,” ambiguity and all, to Attila. For example, Jannai might say
the following:
Today, Attila told me something, but he phrased
it ambiguously.
Attila said that someone heard the shooting of
the hunters.
Unfortunately, under Kemp’s analysis, the above instance of Jannai’s indi-
rect discourse would have to be analyzed in the same manner as (7), and
regardless of the obvious meaning of what Jannai said in the above context,
the report-clause regarding what Attila said would have to be ambiguous.
“That” would have to refer to one of the two propositions expressed by
the utterance that follows it. And the fact that Jannai would have pref-
aced his indirect discourse report with the disclaimer that he meant to
attribute something ambiguous to Attila would be betrayed by an analy-
sis of his indirect discourse that necessitates that Jannai meant to refer to
one of the definite propositions that could be expressed by the ambiguous
utterance. Therefore, according to Kemp’s theory, even in the above con-
text what Jannai is claiming that Attila said would have to be considered
ambiguous.
These are the same entailments of Kemp’s theory that were welcomed
when dealing with the original ambiguity problem, but with my variation
on the ambiguity problem the supposed advantages of Kemp’s theory lead
to wildly implausible results.
Let’s take this issue further yet. Consider a counterexample based on
discourse deixis. The deictic element of the following example highlights
the notion that indirect discourse can be clearly preferable to quotation in
reporting someone’s having said something ambiguous. The obvious nor-
mality and success of the indirect discourse in the example demonstrates
that a successful theory of indirect discourse must be able to account for my
version of the ambiguity problem.
indirect discourse 19
Suppose that Attila remarks to Jannai that Lincoln, a mutual friend,
“heard the shooting of the hunters.” Later, Jannai runs into Lincoln in the
hallway and opens the conversation with the following:
Attila said that you heard the shooting of the hunters.
What did he mean by that?
There is no need for Jannai to quote Attila in the above example. In fact,
it would be somewhat odd for him to have said, “Attila said Lincoln heard
the shooting of the hunters,” when speaking to Lincoln, and it would have
been quite roundabout for Jannai to have opened the conversation with,
“Attila said, and I quote, ‘Lincoln heard the shooting of the hunters.’”
While Jannai could use quotation to meet his desired end, indirect dis-
course is clearly a more efficient and standard means of communication.
Moreover, it is absolutely clear what Jannai is reporting Attila to have said,
and an adequate theory of indirect discourse must be able to account for
the type of examples of which the above is a token.
Kemp’s analysis is evidently not an “adequate” one, as the form he
assigns to Jannai’s indirect discourse report in the above example once
again leaves us with absurd results. For example, Lincoln would have to
ask Jannai to disambiguate which specific proposition of the ambiguous
content -clause Jannai is claiming that Attila said in order to even under-
stand Jannai’s indirect discourse report. Of course, this would entirely
defeat the purpose of Jannai’s inquiry. Kemp’s proposals regarding logical
form obviously cannot account for this new variation of the ambiguity prob-
lem. So, using propositions as the objects referred to by “that” in indirect
discourse fails in the face of an ambiguity problem, just as using utterances
fails in the face of a different ambiguity problem.
It could be proposed that the prop-function theory can be saved by
making a minor modification, one that stipulates that if the target utter-
ance of an indirect discourse ascription is ambiguous and could express
several propositions, then instead of “that” being ambiguous between the
propositions it would denote all of them:
SAID (speaker, the proposition(s) expressed by that). u.
This would mean that if the content-clause (u) were ambiguous, then the
“speaker” is being reported as having said an utterance that shares the same
sort of ambiguity between the same propositions as u. However, this would
be exactly tantamount to the original Davidsonian paratactic theory (that
targets utterances in the case of ambiguity) because Kemp’s principle for
abstracting propositions from utterances is that if two utterances are syn-
onymous, then they express the same proposition.
20 Michael alan Johnson
Kemp’s prop-function theory helped to avoid the original ambiguity
problem by offering some object which could be referred to as an aid in dis-
ambiguating indirect discourse. However, if in order to deal with my new
variation on the ambiguity problem, Kemp’s theory must be modified so
that “that” refers to the set of propositions expressed by the content-clause
in indirect discourse, then it will have lost the very means by which it over-
came the original ambiguity problem.
4
In this concluding section I will move beyond Kemp’s modified
paratactic theory, which I have specifically shown to be unsound, in order
to note that most any formulation of the paratactic theory of indirect
discourse is implausible. Furthermore, I will assert that this is the case
regardless of whether Kemp’s project, and others like it, succeed or fail.
There is a deeper problem for the paratactic theory than adequately deter-
mining what sort of object a content-clause can express.
The paratactic proposal’s plausibility relies on there being a demon-
strative that relates the report-sentence to the content-sentence of an indirect
discourse report. This demonstrative is necessary to relate what Davidson
takes to be two logically independent sentences in a manner that may be
intuitively believed to be the embedding of a clause in a broader sentence.
Without the word “that” playing a demonstrative role in establishing the
paratactic relationship, the paratactic theory would lose all of the viability
that it owes to the surface structure of sentences.
Unfortunately for the paratactic theory, there are many good reasons
to suppose that “that,” in the context of indirect discourse, is not a demon-
strative at all. Instead, “that” appears to function as a complementizer. This
fact acutely weakens the case for the paratactic theory. I will quickly note
a few of the arguments against the demonstrative interpretation of “that”
before offering some observations of my own.
Segal and Speas, for example, apply the “that” of indirect discourse
to the tests used by linguists to determine whether an occurrence of “that”
functions demonstratively or as a complementizer. On every count, they
found that the “that” of ordinary English indirect discourse fails to act as
a demonstrative. For example, the two divergent usages of the word “that,”
known as d-that and c-that,8 have slightly divergent phonetic properties
8 Naturally, d-that denotes the demonstrative “that,” and c-that denotes the complementizer “that.”
indirect discourse 21
in certain contexts.9 The “that” of indirect discourse shares its phonetic
properties with c-that. Furthermore, c-that is deletable in most every senten-
tial context, while d-that is not. For example, it is acceptable to remove the
complementizer “that” from, “He’s the man that I wanted to marry,” but it
is not acceptable to drop the demonstrative “that” from, “Hey look at that
man over there!” Once again, “that” as used in indirect discourse shares its
properties with c-that, this time in virtue of its deletability. Segal and Speas
conclude that because “that” in indirect discourse is a complementizer,
“there are straightforward empirical arguments against viewing [indirect
discourse] as paratactic” (129).10
In addition to the very strong arguments above, there is another prob-
lem regarding the putatively demonstrative “that” of indirect discourse
that is noted by some philosophers11 and linguists. This is the problem of
foreign languages, and it is a problem to which I hope to add some force
with my own considerations. Schiffer and others have highlighted the
fact that some foreign languages, such as French, do not use any terms in
standard indirect discourse reports that are used as, or are homophonic
with, demonstratives. Davidson’s theory seems to be incapable of applying
to such foreign-language indirect discourse reports because there is no
term in an indirect discourse report-clause that can serve to denote the
content-clause.
This is a well-known issue that I wish to aggravate by adding
Hungarian to the list of languages that seem to discredit Davidson’s
theory.12 The Hungarian language can play a unique role in the discredita-
tion of the paratactic theory, as we shall see. This is attributable to the fact
that the standard form of Hungarian indirect discourse reports contain
both a demonstrative and a complementizer. This is unlike other languages
currently discussed in relation to the paratactic theory.
(8) Attila azt mondta, hogy . . .
(8) is a report-clause of a standard Hungarian discourse report. “Attila” is
a name, “azt” translates to “this” or “that,” “mondta” translates to “said,”
9 Specifically, although the demonstrative pronoun “that” must be pronounced [ðæt], informal
speech allows “that,” used as a complementizer, to afford vowel-reduced pronunciation: [ðət].
10 Further evidence against considering the “that” of indirect discourse to be a demonstrative is
offered by Hand, who notes that the use of “that” to demonstrate a segment of discourse subse-
quent to its usage is “conversationally aberrant,” and that using “this” for that purpose is the only
precedent (356).
11 For example Schiffer, Segal, and Speas.
12 Notably, the French and Spanish languages have been used against the paratactic theory.
22 Michael alan Johnson
and “hogy” translates to c-that, as it cannot be used as a demonstrative.
Therefore, (8) is something like “Attila that said, c-that . . . ,” and would
then be followed by a content-clause.
Now, if Davidson’s proposals regarding the demonstrative role of
“that” are correct, then in Hungarian the word “azt” (the demonstrative)
would presumably be indispensable in (8). However, this is not the case.
The following examples illustrate this.13
(9) Attila mondta hogy . . .
(10) *Attila azt mondta . . .
(10') *Attila mondta azt . . .
(9) represents a common Hungarian variation on (8) that is commonly
used and perfectly understood. Note that (9) has omitted “azt” from the
report-clause, and recall that “azt” is the only word from the clause that
could translate as d-that. Still, (9) retains its complementizer “hogy,” and
makes perfect sense.
The reverse cases do not fare well, however. (10) and (10') are exam-
ples in which the complementizer “hogy” is dropped in favor of using the
demonstrative “azt” exclusively. Both of these examples, when followed by
content-clauses, fail to make sense.14
These results seem to indicate that the demonstrative in Hungarian
indirect discourse is entirely superfluous while the complementizer is
essential. Hungarian report-clauses that make exclusive use of a proper
complementizer make sense, while those that make exclusive use of a
demonstrative do not. By its deletability, as well as by its uselessness without
a complementizer, the demonstrative “azt” proves not to be demonstrating
anything.
It is also worth noting that the Hungarian examples may show
Davidson to be misguided not only in his ideas regarding the role of demon-
stratives, but also in regards to the applicability of parataxis itself to indirect
discourse. Neither (8) nor (9) can stand alone as syntactically acceptable
sentences. In order to split a Hungarian indirect discourse report into two
separate sentences one must either have a nonsensical report sentence that
does not successfully refer to its paratactic partner, or remove the word
“hogy” and make the report-sentence into something like (10) or (10'),
13 An asterisk preceding a given example indicates ungrammaticality.
14 Consider: *“Attila azt mondta menjünk innen haverok.” With the addition of “hogy,” the
sentence would be grammatical and could be glossed as “Attila said that we should get out of
here, guys.”
indirect discourse 23
two examples which do not suffice as indirect discourse when a content-
clause is appended. Neither alternative is acceptable.
As we have seen, the original paratactic theory of indirect discourse
requires modification if it is to escape the numerous problems with which
it is faced. Kemp’s attempt at modifying the paratactic theory of indirect
discourse fails to account for my variant of the ambiguity problem, and thus
does not succeed in presenting a tenable alternative to Davidson’s original
formulation of the paratactic theory. Moreover, the paratactic theory has
shown itself to rest on empirically and theoretically dubitable ideas regard-
ing demonstrativity and parataxis. These put it in more basic trouble than
Kemp or other theory-tweakers could account for even if their modified
theories prevailed against critiques.
Without the prima facie evidence of some surface-grammar indication
of the viability of two-sentence parataxis, the paratactic proposal becomes
a theory of logical form without any apparent justification, except reliable
predictions and sound results. However, the paratactic theory lacks even
that shaky foundation, for, as we have noted, the analyses offered of the
paratactic theory’s functions fail to produce reliable predictions and
sound results.
Works Cited
Davidson, Donald. “On Saying That.” Synthese 19 (1968): 130–46.
Frankish, Keith. “How Should We Revise the Paratactic Theory?” Analysis
56.4 (1996): 251–63.
Frege, Gottlob. “Sense and Reference.” Philosophical Review 57 (1948):
209–30.
Hand, Michael. “On Saying That Again.” Linguistics and Philosophy 14
(1991): 349–65.
Kemp, Gary. “Samesaying, Propositions and Radical Interpretation.” Ratio
14.2 (2001): 131–52.
Rumfitt, Ian. “Content and Context: the paratactic theory revisited and
revised.” Mind 102 (1993): 429–54.
Schiffer, Stephen. Remnants of Meaning. Michigan: MIT Press, 1987.
Segal, G. and M. Speas. “On Saying ðət.” Mind & Language 1.2 (1986):
124–32.