Aporiavol. 16 no. 1—2006
Russell and Strawson on Significant Sentences
JEFFJOHNSON
I
n his article “OnReferring”P. F. Strawson argues that Bertrand Russell
mistakenly assumes that significant sentences must be about something
(Strawson, “On Referring”323).1Strawson believes Russell ignores the
distinction between the use of a sentence and the sentence itself, causing
Russell to develop an elaborate and ultimately unnecessary theory. In this
paper, I will outline Russell’s theory, giving reasons that Russell could have
had for his assumption. Then I will put forth Strawson’s criticism and his
own theory. I will show that neither Russell’s nor Strawson’s theory can
adequately handle all problem cases but that a combination of their views
offers the first step toward a viable solution. In particular, I will argue that
elements of both Strawson’s distinction between the use of a sentence and
the sentence itself and Russell’s method of logical analysis are necessary for
a robust theory of how sentences function.
To see the impetus for Russell’s theory, consider the following
two sentences:
S1. The current wife of Prince William of Wales is patient.
S2. The current wife of George W. Bush is patient.
1Hereafter this paper will be cited by the author’s last namefollowed by the number of the page
on which the cited material occurs.
Jeff Johnson is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University. After
graduation in December 2006, he will attend graduate or law school. This essay
won first place in the 2006 David H. Yarn Essay Contest.
2 JEFFJOHNSON
Both of these sentences are significant in a way that poorly formed formu-
las like “box table go” are not. They also both seem more significant than
sentences like “My red dream fights peacefully.” S2 indeed seems quite easy
to understand: I am predicating a certain property about the First Lady,
and this predication is true or false. However, S1 is more problematic.
Given that it is significant and thus likely to express a proposition, what is
S1’s truth value? If we gathered all of the patient individuals and all of the
rash individuals into separate rooms, Prince William’s wife would be in
neither room—she doesn’t exist. How, then, could a sentence like S1, that
seems to be no different from S2, have a truth value, if there are no objects
to which any parts of the sentence refer?
Here Russell’s assumption that significant sentences must be about
something forces him into something of a dilemma: he can hold either
that S1 is not a significant sentence or he can hold that S1 is about some-
thing, but not both. Clearly it is significant, so he must hold that it is about
something. However, since there is no current wife of Prince William, we
either have a sentence that is about a non-existing object that still (some-
how) has properties, or we have to devise a way in which the sentence can
be about something other than such fictional entities. As Russell notes,
Meinong holds the former view; there are non-subsisting but existing
round squares, wives of current bachelors, etc. (Russell, “On Denoting”
14).2 However, this view seems to violate the law of non-contradiction
and thus to be incoherent. It would be more pleasing to have a theory that
avoids such odd metaphysical entities, and it would be nice to have a the-
ory that does not come so close to violating the law of non-contradiction
on questions of existence (the difference between “existing”and “subsisting”
seems quite small).
Russell, then, must find a solution that does not posit odd entities
but still makes sentences like S1 about something. To do so, he distin-
guishes between the grammatical subject and the logical subject of a sen-
tence (Russell 242–43). The former is simply what the sentence seems on
the surface to be about; for S1, the grammatical subject is “the current
wife of Prince William.” However, Russell holds that something far more
2 This article will be cited by its title followed by the page number.
RUSSELLANDSTRAWSONONSIGNIFICANTSENTENCES 3
interesting is happening with the logical subject of such sentences. Russell
holds that “denoting phrases” like “a dog,” “the dog,” and “all dogs” func-
tion not through simply referring but rather by turning the sentences in
which they occur into functions of different sorts (Russell 236–37). Thus,
S1 does not really say anything about Prince William’s wife. Rather, in
Russell’s terminology, it states “The sentence ‘One and only one thing has
the property of being currently married to William and that thing has
patience’ is always true.”3 Rendered more in keeping with modern quan-
tificational logic, we would analyze S1 as “There exists one and only one
thing such that it stands in the relation of marriage to Prince William and
that thing has patience.” Clearly, the offending denoting phrase (in this
case “The current wife of Prince William”) has dropped out of our ana-
lyzed sentence, supposedly taking the problem it causes with it. It also is
readily apparent that our new analyzed sentence can indeed be about some-
thing; in fact, “some thing” is precisely what it is about. Russell then has a
solution to such sentences that avoids Meinongian extremes while allowing
him to keep the assumptions that all significant sentences are about some-
thing and that sentences like S1 are significant. We are really talking about
some thing in sentences like S1, though we are certainly incorrectly ascrib-
ing some of its properties.
Strawson, however, argues that Russell’s assumption has forced him
into this position and that such a position is unnecessary if one reasonably
abandons the assumption. Strawson argues for this by showing the distinc-
tion between the uses of sentences or expressions and the meaning of these
sentences and expressions (Strawson 327). Perhaps this distinction can be
seen best by considering how we would feel about S1 uttered now, while
Prince William is a bachelor, and uttered soon after Prince William gets mar-
ried, if ever a girl be so lucky. It seems that in the latter instance the prob-
lems vanish; this use of the sentence is clearly about Prince William’s
obviously existing wife and is significant. There is, then, something about
the use of a sentence that imbues it with properties that the sentence itself,
stripped of all use and context, does not have. By recognizing this fact, we
can allow sentences like S1 to be significant without having to find logical
3 The analysis is different for each of the different types of denoting phrases such as “a dog” and
“the dog.” For brevity, I will only give the analysis for sentences with denoting phrases containing
the definite article “the.”
4 JEFFJOHNSON
subjects for them (Strawson 328). Instead, we can say that, because they can
be used in our linguistic community, they are significant, though this in no
way means that they must beaboutsomething.
Strawson then develops a more general theory that accounts for these
problem sentences. He distinguishes, as mentioned above, between a sen-
tence and a use of a sentence. He also distinguishes between these two
things and an utterance of a sentence. The uses of a sentence are something
like what the speaker can accomplish with that sentence. The utterance of
a sentence is something like the instantiation of a sentence under a certain
use at a particular time and place by a speaker. For example, I can use the
sentence “I like pizza” to give my wife instructions on my preference for
tonight’s dinner or to express my general gustatory preferences to a
stranger. For Strawson, meaning occurs in sentences themselves. That is,
sentences give “general directions” for their usage according to the rules
and customs of a linguistic community (Strawson 327). Following the pre-
vious example, the general directions given by the sentence “I like pizza” are
probably something like “use this sentence to inform someone about your
preference for a certain kind of food,” thus making it possible for us to use
this sentence in both particular situations (my wife’s question about what
I want for dinner, pizza or salmon) or more generally (the stranger’s query).
Truth occurs at the level of utterance and usage; only after a sentence has
been uttered under a particular usage can it have a truth value. Hence,
according to this more general theory, sentences like S1 can never by them-
selves have a truth value (Strawson 329). But the truth value (or lack
thereof) of such sentences was one motivating factor leading Russell to
look for the logical subject. With Strawson’s new theory in hand, we can
dismiss Russell’s problem sentence and properly distinguish between the
meaning and reference of sentences and expressions.
Russell, though, can immediately reply that Strawson simply points
out a distinction that Russell was implicitly (and reasonably) assuming. The
first reason for thinking that Russell assumes this distinction is that he
describes his example sentences, sentences like S1, as “puzzles” (Russell
240). Clearly, such sentences are only puzzles when they are used in a very
specific context, namely the context in which the object supposedly
referred to by the denoting phrase does not exist. Russell would have no
RUSSELLANDSTRAWSONONSIGNIFICANTSENTENCES 5
problem with an Englishman in 1745 uttering statements about the present
King of France, nor would he have problems with a contemporary
Englishman making similar statements while acting in a play. The second
reason to assume Russell intended to consider only declarative uses of such
sentences is that it is almost always the case that when someone utters or
writes a sentence, they intend to assert a proposition. Granted, in philo-
sophical examples the author may not intend for others to think that he or
she is actually asserting the sentence, but the author still intends that the
reader consider the sentence as a contemporary utterance unless otherwise
specified. Consequently, it is very plausible to believe that Russell intended
to consider only uses of sentences, making Strawson’s distinctions irrele-
vant or implicitly operative in Russell’s work.
This reply, though, is somewhat unsatisfactory. If Russell’s theory
already has accounted for the use of sentences (despite perhaps his sloppy
use of philosophical language), then why the elaborate hunt for the logical
subject? Remember, the assumption that significant sentences need to be
about something led us to the view that they are really about their logical
subjects. Do we still need to hunt for logical subjects of sentences when
only uses of sentences are under consideration? Is there still a place for
Russellian analysis if we accept the distinction? More to the point, can
Russell’s analysis account for something in the use of sentences like S1
that Strawson’s cannot? I believe that it can. Additionally, a theory with
Strawson’s distinction can avoid problems that Russell ignores. The
Strawsonian part of the theory will allow us to dismiss as problems bare
sentences like S1. The Russellian part of the theory will allow us to explain
what problematic uses of sentences like S1 are about.
It is easy to see that Strawson’s distinction removes S1 as a problem
sentence. If the assumption that all significant sentences are about some-
thing is removed, the premise that S1 is significant no longer entails that it
be about something, allowing us to stop looking for what it is about. The
fact that there is more left to be done after Strawson’s distinctions are
drawn is harder to see. Consider, though, Strawson’s own memorable
example of his handkerchief. He states, “If I talk about my handkerchief, I
can, perhaps, produce the object I am referring to out of my pocket. I can’t
produce the meaning of the expression ‘my handkerchief,’ out of my
6 JEFFJOHNSON
pocket” (Strawson 328). Imagine, though, Strawson telling his wife on a
particular occasion that his handkerchief is clean. Imagine also that at the
time of this utterance Strawson in fact has no handkerchief. What will
Strawson’s wife think about Strawson’s most recent usage of the meaning-
ful sentence “My handkerchief is clean”? It seems that she will, with a puz-
zled look on her face, ask him if he is mistakenly talking about something
else, perhaps his red necktie. If he insists that, no, his red handkerchief is
clean, she will most likely either wonder if he has lost his ability to speak
the English language or if his mental machinery is no longer functioning.
Without there being some object that he is trying to talk about, his use of
the sentence “My red handkerchief is clean” becomes exceptionally bizarre.
Indeed, this use of the sentence may even run the risk of becoming
nonsensical or insignificant according to Strawson’s view. If sentences are
meaningful because they give general directions for their use according to
the rules of the linguistic community, sentences like the one above seem
clearly in violation of all such rules. Indeed, this use of the sentence
threatens to become just as incomprehensible, on Strawson’s theory, as
the use of the sentence “My red book fights peacefully.” Although the lat-
ter has at present no possible usage in our linguistic community, it still
seems to be meaningful. Moreover, any usage of it seems the same as a
usage of the handkerchief sentence at a time in which there is no hand-
kerchief. Intuitively, though, it seems that there is a difference between
these sentences, a difference for which Strawson’s theory cannot account.
We simply do not and should not use expressions to assert something
about objects when we know or believe that such objects do not exist. If
such assertions become nonsensical because they are not about anything,
then Strawson’s argument is self-refuting because he can no longer
explain significant uses of sentences. That is, if his theory is true, then a
usage such as the one above violates all general directions laid down by
the sentence and my linguistic community. How, though, could I ever
use a sentence that did this if it is precisely those rules which give mean-
ing to my sentence? Strawson’s theory cannot explain why all uses of sen-
tences must be about something.
Unfortunately for Strawson, we have good reasons for believing that
all uses of significant sentences must be about something, even ones like S1
RUSSELLANDSTRAWSONONSIGNIFICANTSENTENCES 7
or Strawson’s statement about his handkerchief. His theory, then, needs to
be modified. I believe that a Russellian modification, one in which uses of
sentences can be analyzed in a way similar to how Russell analyzes sen-
tences independent of their use, can solve these problems. To show this, we
can look at the independent reasons we have for believing that significant
uses must be about something. One of these reasons is that scientific dis-
course and the advancement of science seem to depend on this fact.
Consider for example the numerous references in historical scientific liter-
ature to “the ether” and “phlogiston.”4The first of these was believed to fill
the immensity of space in order to explain the propagation of light waves
and other interstellar events. The latter was understood as a part of every
combustible substance, the part given off in the combustion process.
Phlogiston, then, explained the fact that the combusted object (usually)
lost mass while the atmosphere gained mass. On Russell’s view, claims
about the ether and about phlogiston are analyzable into claims about
other objects, perhaps the real but as yet undiscovered causes of certain
phenomena. This view seems to explain the process of scientific discovery.
After a scientific theory is put forth, experiments are designed to test the
theory. On Strawson’s view, though, any use of such a statement must go
against the basic rule that we only talk in those ways when such objects
exist. This gives us pause when thinking that such uses are actually about
something since it is hard to see how we could be talking about anything if
we are violating all of the rules laid down in the sentence by the linguistic
community. If the statements about the ether or phlogiston are not really
about some real thing in the world, then experiments could not have
been designed to test those theories, something that clearly happened.
Indeed, how does one go about testing something that does not exist or
something to which no one actually referred?
Additionally, it is rarely the case that all of the phenomena explained
by notions such as the ether and phlogiston are explained falsely; there are
usually many things learned about nature from false theories. On Russell’s
view, this process makes sense. Although there must be at least some prop-
erties falsely ascribed in sentences containing such notions, not all of the
4Strictly speaking, “phlogiston” is not a denoting phrase of the type Russell mentions early in his
article (Russell 235). However, Russell did believe that the vast majority of names were actually
shortened forms of denoting phrases, and thus the comments made above are relevant to the dis-
cussion of denoting phrases and the sentences in which they occur.
8 JEFFJOHNSON
properties need be falsely ascribed. If a scientist made a claim about the
ether that was actually about the real cause of interstellar phenomena, it
becomes much more plausible to think that the newer explanation of the
phenomena will still incorporate true aspects that the sentences with
the denoting phrase “the ether” could explain while eliminating the falsely
ascribed properties of the ether. The existence of science and scientific dis-
covery thus weighs strongly in favor of supposing that uses of sentences like
S1 must mistakenly describe some real thing. This result, though, itself
weighs in favor of a Russellian modification of Strawson’s views.
Another reason for supposing that significant sentences must be
about something is the fact that normal discourse seems to require the sup-
position that individuals, when they are asserting, assert truthfully.
Obviously, the questions of whether or not significant sentences must have
truth values and whether or not they must be about something are dis-
tinct. However, they seem to be intimately related. If a sentence is true, in
what sense can it be so if there is not some part of reality, some object, to
which the sentence in some way relates? It is hard to see how the sentence
“My handkerchief is clean,” asserted by Strawson to his wife, can be true if
he owns no handkerchief. Normal discourse functions on the implicit
assumption that individuals assert correctly. If, when a woman shouted
“The President has been assassinated,” I had to stop and wonder whether
or not she intended to assert, whether or not she had asserted truly, and
whether or not her assertion was about George W. Bush, the use of lan-
guage would become exceptionally laborious and perhaps even impossible.
The reason that it may be impossible is that if we cannot assume that peo-
ple are telling the truth, how could we ever determine the answer to ques-
tions about whether a speaker intended to assert or intended to talk about
a particular entity? It seems then that we have at least a practical reason, if
not a fully theoretical one, for believing that uses of sentences must be about
something, as we must assume that individuals are speaking the truth in
their declarative sentences. Consequently, Russell’s position, one that
explains what sentences are about even in breakdown situations like those
exemplified by S1, seems more plausible than Strawson’s, which does not.
We have shown, then, that neither Russell’s nor Strawson’s theory is
entirely adequate. Russell, by either mistakenly assuming that significant
RUSSELLANDSTRAWSONONSIGNIFICANTSENTENCES 9
sentences themselves must be about something and by failing to demon-
strate how his analyses apply to the use of sentences, has created problems
where in fact there are none. Strawson, by failing to explain the relation-
ship between the general directions given by a sentence and uses in which
those directions are violated, has made understanding the significance of
uses of sentences like S1 quite difficult. However, by incorporating aspects
of each theory into a newer one, these problems may be solved. A theory
that allows for both Strawson’s distinction between the use of a sentence
and the sentence itself and Russell’s logical analysis will be able to solve
these problems. The former part of the theory will reject as problems bare
sentences like S1. The latter part of the theory will enable us to under-
stand what is going on in uses of sentences like S1 at times in which the
grammatical subject does not exist. At least in this case, it seems that com-
promise does in fact solve the problem.5
5 I would like to thank Professor David Jensen of Brigham Young University and Joshua
Roberts-Gillon for helpful discussions about this and related topics in the philosophy of lan-
guage. I would also like to thank Tully Minoski and Russell Farr of Aporiafor helpful revisions
of and responses to this paper.
Works Cited
Russell, Bertrand. “On Denoting.” Mind 14.56 (1905): 479–93. Rpt. in
Logicism and the Philosophy of Language: Selections from Frege and Russell.
Ed. Arthur Sullivan. Mississauga, Canada: Broadview, 2003.
235–49.
Strawson, P. F. “On Referring.” Mind59.235 (1950): 320–44.