Aporia Vol. 6, 1996
A Defense of the Importance of
Emotions, Sentiment, and Feelings
in Moral Reasoning
Sarah E. Kalliney
The source of ethical imperatives is a philosophical question which does
not have a single and obvious answer. One perspective is that they
originate in the human psyche as feelings or sentiments and can thus
be molded and advanced or restrained in whatever way best serves
humanity. This stance was adopted by David Hume in his work entitled
An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. An opposing view main
tains that ethical imperatives are objective, external truths which humans
struggle to come to know. This line of thinking has its origin in the
Platonic Forms and strongly influenced such later theorists as Thomas
Aquinas and Immanuel Kant.
Although the Humean outlook on ethics has been criticized by
succeeding philosophers such as Kant, Hume nevertheless addresses an
important question fundamental to philosophy; is a system of ethics that
is based on sentiment as valid as one based on reason? Emotions play a
vital role in most humans' lives, and by barring them from ethical para
digms, have theorists been uncritical about the nature of human beings?
This essay will attempt to argue that emotions are at least relevant, if
not crucial, to the debate surrounding moral reasoning. By examining
two outstanding paradigms of the philosophical inquiry regarding the
debate, those of Aristotle and Hume, we will begin to understand
the status that human emotions can and should possess in ethics.
Sarah is a senior majoring in philosophy at Skidmore College. She intends to
begin graduate studies in philosophy this fall.
72 SARAH E. KALLINEY
Aristotle's Position
That having a desire to be virtuous is more important than the
relative merits of having knowledge in the realization of true virtue is
the stance argued by Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics. Aristotle
approaches the philosophical question of morality by arguing that
character—a composition of emotional states and dispositions—forms
the heart of ethics, not in contrast to but as a part of rationality. He
begins his discussion of virtue by first defining the different parts of the
soul. He breaks down the soul into three primary components: nutri
tive, appetitive, and rational. The nutritive, nonrational part of the
soul includes a body's ability to grow, reproduce, and metabolize; it is
the principle of life in a thing. Since humans share this capacity of the
soul with "everything that is nourished, ... by nature it has no share
in human virtue" (Nicomachean Ethics llOZbl—14; all Aristotelian ref
erences hereafter are from the Nicomachean Ethics). In other words, the
nutritive component of the human body does not contribute to our
overall conception of moral action.
The appetitive part of the soul, which is also nonrational, pertains
to the human quality of possessing desires. Additionally, this part of the
soul includes feelings and actions. The appetitive part is intriguing
because even though it is nonrational, it also "appears ... to share in
reason"( 1102b26-27). In other words, Aristotle argues that appetitions
can be controlled by reason, a theory which seems to conform easily to
human experience. Take, for example, two adults who are angry with
one another. If they become tempted to hit each other over their dis
pute, both are usually able to control the appetite for physical violence
by reasoning that it is childish, immature, and unnecessary to hurt one
another. This type of thinking (that is, the type whereby reasonable
arguments are in conflict with the appetites) provides substantial evi
dence that a completely rational, nonemotive part of the soul exists.
Appropriately called the rational part, the third component of the soul
has nothing to do with nutrition or appetites. As one might easily surmise,
the rational part includes reason, intelligence, and wisdom.
In accordance with his division of the soul, Aristotle also divides
the virtues into categories. He argues that "some virtues are called
virtues of thought, other virtues of character" (I103a5-6). The virtues
of thought involve pure reasoning, so humans are able to leam them
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS IN MORAL REASONING 73
through rational thought. For example, intellect is a virtue of thought
because intelligence is gained through reasoning and learning. Virtues of
character, on the other hand, entail using reason to control an appetite
or feeling, as opposed to using reason alone. Character virtues, in other
words, have both rational and appetitive components. Consequently,
virtues of character cannot be acquired through the sole application of
reason. Aristotle argues that the only way to acquire virtues of character
(for example, generosity and temperance) is through conditioning and
habituation.
Aristotle writes that "a state [of character] arises from [the repeti
tion of] similar activities.... It is not unimportant, then, to acquire one
sort of habit or another, right from our youth; rather, it is very impor
tant, indeed all important" (1103b21-25). In other words, Aristotle
argues that a truly virtuous or ethical person must be a product of
habituation, or conditioning. To grasp the impottance that he places on
this point is imperative. Just as we learn to play sports, build things, and
create things, so it is with the virtues of character. We must practice
and do virtuous things time and again, not simply learn them in theory;
we must engage in action in order to acquire the virtues of character.
When humans first begin to act temperately they are driven by external
compulsions such as their parents or older people in society that they
admire. By imitating elders repeatedly and through practice, the virtues
will eventually become second nature to humans—they will by driven
by a person's own character. In other words, when we begin our moral
education as children, our behavior is driven mainly by our parents:
virtuous behavior therefore is not natural to us, we must initially learn
it. However, as we get older, virtuous action will eventually seem natural
to us, and our old behavior patterns will feel wrong to us. People must
develop a state, or a constant disposition, that will naturally incline
them to be virtuous.
What type of state, then, should our habituation and conditioning
specifically lead us to? Aristotle writes that the state "is a mean between
two vices, one of excess and one of deficiency; and that it is a mean
because it aims at the intermediate condition in feelings and actions"
(1109a21-23). Virtuous character is a state, not a feeling. A state refers
to how humans are disposed to their feelings. Aristotle indicates in the
above passage that people are virtuous only when they acquire a state
that continually tries to find the mean, or intermediate, in any given
74 SARAH E. KALLINEY
situation. For example," i n feelings of fear and confidence the mean is
bravery"( 1107bl-2). Of course, the mean will vary from person to per
son, depending upon each situation. In the Aristotelian sense, bumans
are characterized as virtuous when they steadily seek the mean.
Understanding why the mean takes on such a vital role in
Aristotle's moral philosophy is crucial. For Aristotle, virtuous actions
must be performed from a firm, unchanging state because the character
of a person is a much more reliable foundation of morality than mere
knowledge of it (1115bl0-20). For instance, presumably one knows
that cheating and lying are not moral actions. Ffowever, in situations in
which cheating and lying are ultimately beneficial, one may be very
tempted to cheat or lie, despite having knowledge of how wrong it is to
engage in such acts. Aristotle would agree. This is precisely why one
needs a moral character to be virtuous and why mere knowledge of the
virtues is insufficient. Knowledge, in other words, might ultimately end
in confusion or inconsistency, while the strength of a virtuous character
is relatively unwavering.
The crux of the Aristotelian conception of virtue relies on char
acter development. Simply put, humans must possess a virtuous charac
ter in order to behave morally. Additionally, we need an inclination or
desire to behave ethically because knowledge alone is not sufficient to
motivate us towards virtuous action. Morality therefore results from a
disposition or character which is inclined towards ethics. In this sense,
our emotions and feelings are an absolutely necessary component of
ethical conduct because without the desire to find the mean in a given
situation, our knowledge of morality is superfluous. Aristotle sees moral
education as a process of conditioning our desires and passions. The
virtuous person is not simply one who understands the nature of virtue,
but rather is one who desires to act virtuously.
However, it is also extremely important to note that Aristotle's
emphasis on conditioning does not exclude the significance that reason
and intelligence have in the moral agent. Rather, he maintains that
reason is indispensable to morality. As was indicated earlier, virtues of
character, such as temperance and generosity, are not the only types.
Aristotle additionally claims that humans can also possess virtues of
thought, such as wisdom and intelligence. Intellect is cultivated by a
good character (and vice versa); moreover, it is absolutely necessary in
order to determine the means of acquiring an end (1144b32). Character
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS IN MORAL REASONING 75
virtues, in other words, determine the correct end, or goal (that is, the
mean), while intelligence determines how to achieve that goal. For
example, if one's character determines that one should become more
generous, reason may instruct the individual to donate money to charity.
Aristotle writes that "if someone acquires understanding, he improves
in his actions; and the state he now has, though still similar [to the
natural one], will be virtue to the full extent"( 1144bl3-14). Moreover,
intelligence is choice-worthy in itself (because it is a virtue of the soul),
so humans should strive for it, irrespective of its relative importance
to character.
Hume's Position
Having thus explained why character (and hence desire and emo
tion) takes on such an important role and how reason too is critical to
understanding Aristotle's ethics, it will be interesting to compare his
ideas with Hume's arguments in An Enquiry Concerning the Principles
of Morals and A Treatise on Human Nature. Hume ultimately maintains
that morality is based solely on sentiment, not character, thereby
arguing that emotions are paramount, taking on an even more impor
tant role in the moral agent than Aristotle argues they do. Like
Aristotle, though, Hume ultimately concludes that reason and senti
ment both are essential to virtue, but each contributes uniquely to
morality.
Hume comments that a fundamental concern in philosophy has
been about the "combat of passion and reason" (Treatise 413). And in
philosophy it is typical "to give the preference to reason, and to assert
that men are only so far virtuous as they conform themselves to its dic
tates"( 413). Hume also states that throughout the history of philosophy,
most thinkers involved in the study of ethics have been arguing that
given the two potential bases of morality (namely, passion or reason),
ethics must be based on reason and not sentiment. In order for him to
prove that morality is indeed based on sentiment, Hume must argue first
that moral distinctions cannot be derived from reason, and second that
ethics must therefore be grounded in sentiment.
His arguments supporting his position that reason does not provide
us with a foundation for ethics are engaging. In order to understand the
premise of his arguments, one must first understand how he defines
76 SARAH E. KALLINEY
reason. He writes in the Treatise that reason "comprehends . . . the
relation of cause and effect. Here then reasoning takes place to discover
this relation" (414). Reason thus intuits universal and necessary con
nections between two subjects. For example, it is an act of reason when
we draw inferences from mathematical axioms. In this sense, reason is
confined wholly to matters of fact.
That we cannot find the morality (or lack thereof) within an action
is an argument that Hume makes throughout the Treatise. No action, in
other words, has in itself an inherent moral quality. The supposed vices
or virtues of an act cannot be intuited by reason, because they are not
matters of fact (Treatise 468). Reason consists of the knowledge of
specific facts and relationships, but it does not involve making moral
distinctions. For precisely this fact, morality must ultimately be based on
sentiment. Hume sums up this point in the Enquiry by stating that
"reason instructs us in the several tendencies of actions, and humanity
[human sympathy] makes a distinction in favour to those which are
useful and beneficial [those which are moral]" (83). Hume argues that
there is no characteristic of morality or immorality in an action. When
humans say that an action is immoral, they actually are speaking about
the emotional response that the action evokes. The action itself does
not have an immoral characteristic that reason detects.
Analyzing a specific example may help to illustrate Hume's argu
ment. Take, for instance, the act of murder. Reason deciphers all the
facts of the action, but it will not discern whether the action is immoral.
No reasonable aspect of the action will reveal its morality, so when we
judge the act immoral, we are actually referring to our emotional response
to the deed. Hume writes in the Enquiry that "the vice entirely escapes
you, as long as you consider the object. You never can find it, till you
turn your reflection into your own breast, and find a sentiment of disap
probation, which arises in you, towards this action" (122).
In a separate argument, Hume explains why humans often value
moral behavior in others. Because Hume bases his moral standards on
their usefulness to the moral agent or their public utility, humans, he
argues, tend to value what promotes the good of others. As he states in
the Enquiry," every thing, which contributes to the happiness of society,
recommends itself directly to our approbation and good-will" (43).
Humans take an interest in the good of others because we all have inter
est in the good of society. The existence of such feelings of goodwill
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS IN MORAL REASONING 77
toward others provides supportive evidence that our morality can at
least potentially be based on sentiment and not reason.
Hume argues that we all have a kind of natural propensity to the
good of humanity. The human sympathy that we feel toward others is a
natural state. Charities provide an excellent illustration of human
sentiment. Some of us feel sensitive to the needs of others who are less
fortunate and consequently help provide food and shelter to the poor.
As Hume states:
In some cases, [everyone] must unavoidably feel some propensity to
the good of mankind, and make it an object of choice, if everything
else be equal. Would any man, who is walking along, tread as will
ingly on another's gouty toes, whom he has no quarrel with, as
on the hard flint and pavement?. . . We surely take into consider
ation the happiness and misery of others. (Enquiry 45)
To sum up, Hume contends that humans are inherently sympathetic to
others in society. The amount of sympathy may vary from person to per
son (and it clearly does vary), hut nevertheless it exists in each of us.
Sympathy is something of which human beings are capable — sometimes
we act for the welfare of others without regard to the advantage we might
gain. There may thus he a very direct connection between sympathetic
tendencies and many of our morally commendable, unselfish actions.
Furthermore, it is argued that human beings necessarily must have
feelings of natural sympathy in order for there to be such a thing as kind
ness. In "The Ethical Importance of Sympathy," H. B. Acton suggests
that although "purely rational" beings (as opposed to merely sentient
creatures) could be instructed as to how to improve the conditions of
sentient beings, they would not thereby be helping them, since they
would be unable to understand why it was that the sentient beings
needed help. He states that the attitude that purely rational people
would exhibit "toward other people's hunger and thirst, for exam
ple, would be more like that of a mechanic towards an engine that was
running out of fuel than [that] of a man towards another man in
trouble" (62). Without sympathetic motivation to help others, such a
person would need a reason for helping them. No evident reason for
helping others occurs in situations when other people do not actually
need help, but in which help would be valuable. The" u nfeeling rational
78 SARAH E. KALLINEY
being," Acton points out, "could only be a parasite helper" (63). Thus
not only are human beings motivated by sympathy, but also no authen
tically kind acts could exist if humans were not naturally sympathetic
toward one another.
Hume, like Aristotle, also concludes that reason plays an essential
part in ethics because it is needed to tell us that "certain types of char
acter or conduct tend to produce happiness or misery in the agent or in
other men"( Broad 106-07). When situations are complex and the con
sequences are mixed, reason is needed to analyze the situation and to
estimate the balance of happiness or misery which is likely to result.
Reason then may not be sufficient to account for moral reasoning, but
it is vital to the Humean conception of moral behavior. In order to know
which course of action will ultimately be beneficial to oneself or society,
reason is often employed. So, while Hume and Aristotle both argue
that reason is essential to morality, they disagree about its function.
The former argues that reason is needed to direct our actions to those
which produce the most happiness; the latter maintains that reason is
necessary to determine the means of acquiring an end.
Criticism
Disagreement also exists in refetence to the relative success of
each philosopher's arguments. Hume's arguments, in particular, have
met with much criticism. As noted earliet, Kant disagrees with both
Aristotle and Hume. He argues in the Grounduiork of the Metaphysic of
Morals that morality must be grounded solely in reason and that char
acter and human sentiment have nothing at all to do with truly moral
behavior. Kant maintains that morality cannot be based on character
and sympathy because these are not in full control of the agent; they
fluctuate and are relative (93). Furthermore, feelings such as sentiment
and sympathy are totally subjective and can be easily overcome. Some
people feel an abundance of sympathy, while some feel hardly any at all.
Moteover, when morality is based on feelings, it becomes impossible to
make morality obligatory to the individual. For example, criminals are
people who supposedly feel less sympathetic toward others, but no one
can make them feel more sympathy than they naturally have. It is absurd
to argue that we can teach others how to have feelings or try to make
othets feel something that by nature they do not.
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS IN MORAL REASONING 79
Kant raises an interesting issue here, and Anne Thomson also
speaks to it in her article entitled "Emotional Origins of Morality—A
Sketch." The point is that sympathy is not impartial. Thomson observes
that "we tend to have a greater concern for the welfare of those we love
than for the welfare of those with whom we have a less close relation
ship" (Thomson 203). Therefore, she writes, we will turn to our senses
of justice when conflicts arise, rather than depend on our feelings of
sentiment. Hume himself admits in the Enquiry that according to his
theory of moral reasoning, it is indeed possible that "a sensible knave ...
may think, that an act of iniquity or infidelity will make a considerable
addition to his fortune, without causing any considerable breach in the
social union" (Enquiry 81). However, while Kant and Thomson agree
that this strong objection may provide good evidence of the limits of
Hume's moral system, Hume maintains that no one can carry on this
type of behavior for long, because eventually all of the trickery will
"catch up" with the individual. Inevitably, a person will feel the impor
tance of "inward peace of mind, consciousness of integrity, [and] a
satisfactory review of [his] own conduct" that arises only from moral
behavior (Enquiry 82). On this point, most would agree that at best Hume
provides only a thoroughly weak defense of his position.
Another compelling counterargument to Hume that Thomson
explores begins with the observation that "sympathy does not embody
value judgments about the enterprises of those with whom we sympa
thize" (Thomson 203). In other words, she criticizes Hume's position
which takes for granted that human sentiment and sympathy will always
be directed toward the promotion of private or public utility. One could,
however, easily sympathize with someone's vengeful feelings, but the
decision "as to whether one should help the person to seek vengeance
would require more than the emotion of sympathy" (Thomson 203).
Clearly, then, it is possible to imagine having misdirected feelings of
sympathy, but feelings of sympathy nonetheless. In this case, could Hume
deny that sentiment itself may not always be sufficient foundation for
moral reasoning?
Conclusions
Sympathy, as Hume argues, probably could not be the medium of
all moral judgment (for the reasons stated above), but it can be viewed
80 SARAH E. KALLINEY
for good reason as a necessary characteristic of beings who make critical
moral judgments. One way to reconcile the apparent problems of incor
porating sentiment into an ethical theory may be to bring in the
notion of "practical sympathy," which can be seen as an essential char
acteristic of the moral being. Practical sympathy is a feeling that is
guided by humans'f aculty of reason. Humans should, in other words, act
according to feelings of sympathy when they are reasonably appropriate
(for example, acting on feelings of sympathy toward a person seeking out
vengeance would not be appropriate). Another example that Thomson
calls upon points out that "it seems inconceivable that beings could
exist who reacted critically towards the perpetrators of harm and yet
remained insensitive to the distress of victims of harm"( Thomson 204).
Feelings are essential to morality as such; unless we act out of desire
or feeling, we cannot be acting morally. When rationalists argue that
mere recognition of ethical characteristics by reason is sufficient to
account for moral feeling and moral action, they are wrong, and Hume's
and Aristotle's arguments show why they are wrong. Emotions must be
incorporated into an ethical theory.
Perhaps, then, the best ethical theory must argue for the type of
intermediate perspective that Aristotle puts forth. This view recognizes
that although emotion is unavoidable, it can inordinately influence
reason. Thus, while emotion can provide us with an intuitive perception
of actions that seem morally repugnant (as with Hume's feelings of sym
pathy), we should nevertheless aim at conditioning other types of
emotion that will work against the (sometimes) quite subtle feelings
of sentiment. Aristotle also gives adequate importance to reason because
while he maintains that emotion is vital to ethics, reason is just as
crucial to the formation of the moral agent. Humans need to be able
to justify and mitigate ethics with rational and coherent arguments in
order to find common ground. Employing rational thinking in conver
sations about ethics is absolutely critical to developing laws and standards
among individuals because reason is exponentially less subjective than
sentiment.
As Robert Solomon writes, imagining
aesthetics without enthusiasm for art or philosophy of religion
without faith or feeling can be the most pointless of subjects. But
it is ethics and social philosophy that provide us with our most
THE IMPORTANCE OF EMOTIONS IN MORAL REASONING 81
embarrassing examples; how could these subjects of human behav
ior .. . have turned out to he so uninvolved in human behavior?
(Soloman 45)
Aristotle's theory of morality works well precisely because it acknowl
edges that emotions are a fundamental part of the human experience
and that trying to exclude them from ethics is unnecessary and indeed
uncritical. It is indeed a rather futile exercise to totally exclude emotions
from the moral agent. We should attempt to condition our emotions and
use them to promote the good life. Countless have demonstrated that a
place for emotions in ethics exists, and we have for too long tried to do
without them.
Works Cited
Acton, H. B. "The Ethical Importance of Sympathy." Philosophy 30
(1955): 59-65.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Trans. Terence Irwin. Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1985.
Broad, C. D. Five Types of Ethical Theory. London: Rouledge & Kegan
Paul, 1962.
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. Ed. J. B.
Schneewind. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983.
. Treatise on Human Nature. Ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford:
Clarendon P, 1988.
Kant, Immanuel. Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. Trans. H. J.
Paton. New York: Harper, 1964.
Solomon, Robert C. "Beyond Reason: The Importance of Emotion in
Philosophy." Revisioning Philosophy. Ed. James Ogilvy. Albany:
SUNY P, 1992.
Thomson, Anne. "Emotional Origins of Morality—A Sketch." Journal
of Moral Education 18.3 (1989): 199-207.