AporiaVol. 13 number 1—2003
Socratic Knowledge and the Daimonion*
D. PHILIP KENNY
A
fter being sentenced to death, Socrates told the jurors they gained
nothing from it. He then spoke to the jurors who voted against the
punishment of death, revealing that a guilty verdict must be what is
good to the god. Socrates revealed that in all previous times his daimonion,
a warning voice, opposed him whenever he was about to do something
wrong. However, the daimonion did not stop him from leaving home that
morning, coming to the court, or speaking to the jurors. He asks:
What do I think is the reason for this? I will tell you. What has hap-
pened to me may well be a good thing, and those of us who believe
death to be an evil are certainly mistaken. I have convincing proof of
this, for it is impossible that my familiar sign did not oppose me if I
was not about to do what was right.1
Socrates is able to conclude that the lack of the daimonion’s constraint is
convincing proof that his current action is good. This is a significant form
of wisdom—to be able to know and understand what the god desires for
him. However, earlier in this dialogue, he makes this confession: “For I cer-
tainly do not possess [human wisdom], and whoever says I do is lying and
* Daimonionand daimonmean essentially the same thing and scholars use both terms. I will use both
interchangeably in this paper.
1Apology40b–c, italics added.
D. Philip Kenny is a senior philosophy major at Brigham Young University. This
fall he will attend the University of Chicago School of Law. This essay won second
place in the 2003 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition.
D. PHILIPKENNY 27
speaks to slander me … I am very conscious that I am not wise at all.”2
These two passages appear to be a contradiction in Socrates’ reasoning.
However, I will demonstrate that the knowledge Socrates receives from the
daimonion is not the philosophical knowledge he seeks but does not pos-
sess. I will first explain Socrates’ search for divine wisdom and his claim to
ignorance. Second, I will analyze the knowledge the daimonionprovides to
Socrates. Third, I will refute the claim that the daimoniontrumps Socrates’
own ratiocination. Finally, I will conclude that the knowledge Socrates
receives from the daimonion is neither the knowledge he seeks, nor the
knowledge of which he claims to be ignorant.
The Search for Knowledge and the Claim to Ignorance
In the Apology, Socrates claims that his philosophical search for
knowledge is an obligation and duty to the God. He traces this mission
and “service to the god” to the Delphic Oracle.3 Prior to this experience,
Socrates lived a life of philosophy; in fact, philosopher Mark L. McPherran
believes it is “reasonable to suppose that Socrates had been wielding the
elenchoson topics of ethical import for a good deal of time prior to his set-
ting about to ‘refute’ the Oracle.”4It would seem that his inquisitive mind
at this time was at least impressive enough to prompt Chaerephon to trav-
el to the Delphic Oracle, pay him, and question him as to the extent of
Socrates’ knowledge.5The Oracle told Chaerephon that no one was wiser
than Socrates. When Socrates heard this reply he was skeptical, believing
that he was not wise in any matter.6 He felt the Oracle’s reply must be
some sort of riddle by God. The only way to understand the riddle was to
find someone wiser than himself.
Socrates began his mission questioning the citizens of Athens who
claimed to have knowledge. He went to the politicians, only to find that
2Apology20e, 21b.
3Apology23b.
4McPherran 215.
5Ibid.
6Yonezawa 349.
28 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
“none of them knew anything ‘beautiful and good.’”7 Although they
appeared to be wise, they did not know anything.8 He then went to the
poets, but found they “[did] not compose their poems with knowledge, but
by some inborn talent and by inspiration, like seers and prophets who also
say many fine things without any understanding of what they say.”9Finally,
Socrates confronted the craftsmen. Although they possessed a technical
knowledge in their specialized field, they falsely claimed to have knowl-
edge outside of their specialty.10
It seemed that Socrates’ search for wisdom was fruitless. “His activ-
ities had only revealed to him that he lacked all such wisdom, while oth-
ers seemed to have a portion.”11 However, he began to understand the
Oracle’s meaning. It was precisely this antihubristic principle that Delphi
had always insisted upon;12namely, that human wisdom is relatively mean-
ingless, as wise men realize.13It was at this point that his mission of system-
atically questioning people who claimed expert knowledge began. He
searched not for a worthless, worldly, and illusory knowledge, which the
wise men of Athens possessed, but for the wisdom the gods possessed:
“divine wisdom,” specifically, an expert moral knowledge.14
The Platonic dialogues make it clear that expert moral knowledge is
a craft. First, Socrates’ understanding of divine wisdom as a craft is evi-
dent in his belief about the gods. Since divine knowledge is held by the
gods, Socrates concludes that they are divine craftsmen, having a spe-
cific purpose and function.15 Second, the knowledge he is
seeking—piety, temperance, justice, and so on—must have the same quali-
ties as a craft.
Exploring the definition of piety, Socrates shows a discrepancy in
Euthyphro’s definition by using a craft analogy. Euthyphro claims that
7Cross 112.
8Apology 21c.
9Apology22c.
10Cross 112.
11McPherran 216.
12Ibid.
13Cross 112.
14McPherran 217.
15Euthyphro13d–14a.
D. PHILIPKENNY 29
piety is tendance to the gods. However, “horses cared for by horse breeders
are benefited and become better.… Is piety then, which is the care of the
gods, also to benefit the gods and make them better?”16Euthyphro denies
this and immediately understands that his definition does not work with
the craft analogy. In the Charmides, Socrates tests a definition of temper-
ance by comparing it to the work of a craftsman. He says,
And does a doctor have to know when he cures in a useful way and
when he does not? And so with each of the craftsmen: does he have
to know when he is going to benefit from the work he performs and
when he is not?17
In the Republic, Socrates makes it clear that the wisdom for which he is
searching, namely justice, is a craft. He asks, “Now, what does the craft we
call justice give, and to whom or what does it give it?”18
Expert moral knowledge shares all of the qualities of a craft. Among
other things, Socrates requires a craft to be teachable and learnable, expli-
cable, repeatable and inerrant when the form is followed, unique, and
functioning. It must also count as a form of knowledge or virtue, as seen
in the Gorgias. Socrates argues that oratory may fit the other characteristics
of a craft, but it lacks the virtuous element. He compares it to pastry bak-
ing, which “isn’t a craft but a knack and a routine … along with [oratory,]
cosmetics and sophistry.”19We see here that a craft must count as a form
of knowledge or virtue. Socrates’ requirement that expert moral knowl-
edge must be a craft is found often in the dialogues. For instance,
Alcibiades claims to have justice, but Socrates desires to know who the
teacher was “who taught [him] how to tell the difference between the more
just and the less just.”20 In the Euthyphro, Socrates expected piety to be a
craft. For instance, the definition of piety had to be unique: specific
16Euthyphro13b–c.
17Charmides164b.
18Republic332d.
19Gorgias463b.
20Alcibiades109d.
30 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
enough to only refer to the craft of piety, yet general enough to include all
instances of piety.
Understanding the type of knowledge Socrates seeks does not
resolve the problem of how he can claim to be ignorant. It would seem
implausible that Socrates could make a disavowal of all forms of knowl-
edge. After all, it is evident that he has enough knowledge to speak a lan-
guage and rationally analyze arguments. In fact, he admits, “I do know,
however, that it is wicked and shameful to do wrong, to disobey one’s
superior, be he god or man.”21 This implies that another type of knowl-
edge must exist outside of craft knowledge: a nonexpert knowledge.
Socrates admits that he is capable of learning things on the basis of
abstract reasoning. In the Crito he says, “We must therefore examine
whether we should act in this way or not, as not only now but at all times
I am the kind of man who listens to nothing within me but the argument
that on reflection seems best to me.”22He determines what seems best in
a situation after some deliberation. However, this knowledge is not a con-
crete, teachable, craft knowledge. It is a subjective knowledge or opinion,
capable of being changed or refuted at any time when further deliberation
or evidence finds it an insufficient explanation. Even if Socrates attempt-
ed the elenchus 999 times and discovered the same conclusion each time,
there is always the possibility that the one-thousandth elenchuswould have
a different result.23There is no way for him to determine that his conclu-
sion is the final or true conclusion.
The Daimonionas a Source of Knowledge
Although many articles have been written on the meaning and func-
tion of the daimonion, much of this information stretches the evidence
to its limit. In actuality, Plato’s descriptions in the dialogues are vague. I
will attempt to present the information in the purest form possible, with-
out intentionally making any unwarranted assumptions.
21Apology29b.
22Crito46b.
23Yonezawa 331.
D. PHILIPKENNY 31
Mention of a daimonis not unique to the Platonic dialogues. In fact,
others have claimed to have a daimon; examples are found in the Ennead
and Porphyry’s Life of Plotinus.24Some interpret the Timaeusto be evidence
that each of us has a daimonion, found in “the most sovereign part of our
soul as god’s gift to us, given to be our guiding spirit.”25 Xenophon’s
description of the daimonion differs from Plato’s in that the sign was not
restricted to prohibitions.26 Although these alternative explanations may
be helpful in another literary analysis, we will restrict our discussion to
Plato’s understanding of the daimonion, in light of his statement found
parenthetically in the Republic, that “the divine sign, is hardly worth men-
tioning—for I suppose it has happened to few or none before [Socrates].”27
If this is the case, it is clear that Socrates’ daimonionis more than the com-
mon voice of conscience. James Beckman writes that the daimonionis “con-
fined to future contingencies (as opposed to pangs of conscience after the
act) and does not always have to do with judgments of moral value;”28 it
is most often concerned with the practical consequences of Socrates’
action. If Socrates’ daimonis similar to the daimonthat each man is able to
choose in the Myth of Er,29 it is clear that Socrates’ has either made
himself more able to receive daimonicalarms or his daimonis superior to
others.
The daimonion can best be understood in the Apology. Socrates
explains how it influenced him not to enter politics:
You have heard me give the reason for this in many places. I have a
divine or spiritual sign which Meletus has ridiculed in his depo-
sition. This began when I was a child. It is a voice, and whenever it
speaks it turns me away from something I am about to do, but it
never encourages me to do anything.30
24Rist 13.
25Timaeus90a.
26Rist 16.
27Republic 496c.
28Beckman 76
29Republic620d.
30Apology31c–d.
32 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
The voice warns that an action will not be beneficial in the end.31 In the
dialogues, Socrates often hears the daimonion in reference to trivial non-
religious matters. For instance, Socrates explains to Alcibiades that he
never spoke to him all these years because he “was prevented by some
divine being.”32 In the Theaetetus, Socrates describes hubristic interlocu-
tors who, after leaving him, sometimes come back to Socrates, wanting to
learn again: “[W]hen that happens, in some cases the divine sign that vis-
its me forbids me to associate with them; in others, it permits me, and
then they begin again to make progress.”33In the Euthydemus, we learn of
the daimon’s prophetic ability:
I was sitting by myself in the undressing-room . . . and was already
thinking of leaving. But when I got up, my customary divine sign put
in an appearance. So I sat down again, and in a moment the two of
them, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, came in.34
Socrates was not permitted to leave before having a discussion with these
two youths.35
Although on several occasions Plato insists that the daimonis restrict-
ed to negative alarms, the Phaedrus gives reason to doubt this claim. As
Socrates is about to end his speech, the daimonionforbids him. He states,
My friend, just as I was about to cross the river, the familiar divine
sign came to me which, whenever it occurs, holds me back from
something I am about to do. I thought I heard a voice coming from
this very spot, forbidding me to leave until I made atonement for
some offense against the gods.36
He then proceeds to give a second, more reverent speech. This may be
interpreted as evidence of a positive command by the daimonion. It is true
that Plato does not make it exactly clear how Socrates deduces the mean-
31Beckman 76.
32Alcibiades103a.
33 Theaetetus151a.
34Euthydemus272e–273a.
35Beckman 76.
36Phaedrus242b–c.
D. PHILIPKENNY 33
ing of the daimonicsign, but I believe that this passage can be explained. If
Socrates has the ability to ignore the sign, he may have received the alarm
prior to his speaking of the offensive words. Although he spoke the words
and the sign went away (for he was no longer going to offend the god fur-
ther) the sign returned during the attempt by Socrates to withdraw. At this
moment, it would have been better to withdraw his previous offense than
to simply leave. Although this explanation is by no means definitive, it
shows that the passage in question provides no conclusive contradiction
in Plato’s writings.
Admittedly, the daimonion appears to be nothing extravagant, per-
haps explainable by modern psychology. However, Socrates believed that
it was much more than this. It is unlikely he could have considered com-
mon intuition something that few or none had ever had before him.
Unfortunately, the information we learn from Plato regarding the daimo-
nionis scanty. Philosopher John M. Rist believes, “This scantiness may well
reflect the fact that Plato, who almost certainly regarded his master as
especially gifted, felt awed in speaking of the daimonion.”37Beckman has a
different explanation:
[I]f one assumes that the vagueness of Socrates’ conceptualization of
the voice is not the vagueness of that which cannot be expressed in
rational discourse, but rather purposive vagueness due to the strict-
ness and consistency of his philosophical agnosticism, quite another
result is obtained. Socrates’ description of the daimonionreveals noth-
ing about any god . . . precisely because no such thing is revealed to
him.38
All that Socrates receives is the voice. It is not some special revelation, sim-
ilar to many of the other prophetic voices of his time, proceeding as hid-
den messages from oracles and diviners, incomprehensible to human
understanding. To Socrates, it is merely what it appears to be: a voice, a
hunch or intuition that “comes” to him. “It does not proceed from the
37Rist 16.
38 Beckman 77.
34 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
narrow circle of his conscious, willed activity; it does not proceed from his
ego.”39
The information Socrates receives from the daimonion aids him in
his philosophical search for knowledge. A daimonicalarm is able to give a
unique knowledge to Socrates that his current action will not produce the
best outcome. In this sense, the daimonion appears to be utilitarian in
nature. The daimonconsistently gives Socrates, on a frequent basis, knowl-
edge of what actions will lead to future harmful or unbeneficial outcomes
that he would never have known beforehand by his own human reason-
ing.40
Other than the alarm, the daimoniongives Socrates, ex silentio, anoth-
er powerful access to knowledge. In the Apology, Socrates says that the dai-
monion’s silence is “convincing proof” that his death will “be a good thing.
. .for it is impossible that my familiar sign did not oppose me if I was not
about to do what was right.”41 Thomas C. Brickhouse and Nicholas D.
Smith point out that this gives Socrates “an incredibly powerful access to
moral truth.”42If Socrates ever wanted to find out whether something was
good or bad, he would only need to make an attempt toward something
and see if the daimonic alarm sounded. If it did not, he could know that
his current action was good.
The Daimonionvs. Reason
Brickhouse and Smith point out an apparent problem with Socrates’
use of the daimonion.43 As we have already noted, Socrates claims to be a
rationalist, who only accepts truth on the basis of reason. He states, “At all
times I am the kind of man who listens to nothing within me but the argu-
ment that on reflection seems best to me.”44 However, Brickhouse and
Smith point out that “surely it is not reason that tells us to obey ‘oracles
39Beckman 77.
40McPherran 186–187.
41Apology40b–c.
42Brickhouse and Smith, “The Divine Sign … ” 515.
43Brickhouse and Smith, “Socrates’ Gods … ” 82.
44Crito41b.
D. PHILIPKENNY 35
and dreams,’ or signs and voices, but rather a very unsophisticated and
superstitious sort of religious faith.”45
Socrates considers the knowledge he gains from the daimonionto be
greater than his own reason. Brickhouse and Smith believe that if
Socrates’ reason were to ever conflict with the daimonion, he would choose
the daimonionto “trump” his own conclusion. This is evident in Socrates’
teachings on wisdom. In the Apology, he understands that the wisdom of
men, including his own wisdom, is “worth little or nothing,” while “the
god is wise.”46 In other words, any thought, command, or persuasion
from the god will be more reliable than any thought, idea, impulse, or
decision made by Socrates.
Smith and Brickhouse further believe that Socrates’ daimonion
would trump his own ratiocination based on the situations Socrates gives
when he receives the alarm. For instance, in the Apology, Socrates describes
the daimonion as opposing him “often, even in small matters, when [he]
was about to do something wrong.”47They point out that in order for the
alarm to oppose Socrates before doing something wrong, Socrates would
have already deliberated on the action, made a decision, and nearly acted
when the daimonion opposes him. However, in each example, Socrates
obeys the daimonion, trumping his premeditated action. “[H]e does so in
spite of whatever reasons he may have had for taking the action in the first
place, reasons which led him to be on the verge of taking the action, if
only his daimonionhad not intervened.”48
Although Brickhouse and Smith have remained dedicated to their
conclusion, despite the “differences of opinion among contemporary
scholars,”49I feel that their explanation is insufficient. A superior explana-
tion must be able to reconcile Socrates’ assertion in the Crito that he lis-
tens to nothing but reasonable arguments with the evidence that he
appears to disregard his previous ratiocination.
45Brickhouse and Smith, “Socrates’ Gods … ” 82.
46Ibid.; Apology23a5–7.
47Apology40a4–6.
48Brickhouse and Smith, “Socrates’ Gods … ” 83.
49Ibid., 82.
36 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
I argue that Socrates does not disregard reason in light of a daimonic
alarm. As we have discussed, Socrates chooses the conclusion “that on
reflection seems best” to him.50 If Socrates were to receive further evi-
dence, after reasoning and coming to a conclusion with the previous evi-
dence, it would seem reasonable that he would reevaluate his argument in
light of the new evidence. What greater expert witness could count as suf-
ficient evidence for Socrates than a prompting by the divine voice?
Contrary to Brickhouse and Smith, the daimonion does not “trump”
Socrates’ reasoning, but becomes a key piece of evidence, or knowledge, in
determining his decision.
The Daimonionas Expert Moral Knowledge
With this understanding of the daimonionand the knowledge it gives
to Socrates, we are able to explore the paradox at hand: why Socrates
would claim ignorance and have the need to philosophize when he has
such a great source of knowledge given by the daimonion. First, I will estab-
lish the authenticity of his claim to ignorance. Second, I will examine the
problems of daimonicknowledge. Third, I will demonstrate the daimonion’s
inability to qualify as the craft knowledge, or divine expert knowledge that
Socrates seeks.
It would seem that Socrates’ claim to ignorance is insincere.
However, thinking him insincere would call his integrity into question.51
In the Apology, the claim to ignorance is central to his argument against
his first accusers, and he continually assures the jurors to “be sure that all
that I shall say is true.”52For this reason, it seems that in order to resolve
the paradox, we must go beyond accusing Socrates of insincerity.
Therefore, we must further analyze the knowledge Socrates receives from
the daimonion.
50Crito41b.
51Brickhouse and Smith, “The Divine … ” 517–8.
52Ibid., 518; Apology20d.
D. PHILIPKENNY 37
Let us examine the daimonicformula:
A. If Socrates does X in situation A at moment P, and receives the
daimonic alarm, Socrates can conclude that X is not good in sit-
uation A at moment P.
B. If Socrates does X in situation A at moment P, and does not
receive the daimonic alarm, Socrates can conclude that X is good in
situation A at moment P.
It is clear that if Socrates accepts what he learns from either of these two
experiences as divine wisdom, it would be impossible for us to resolve the
paradox; he would surely be claiming to have expert knowledge and at the
same time be ignorant of it. However, these final pages will demonstrate
that Socrates is unable to claim that the knowledge he receives from the
daimonionis expert moral knowledge.
The main problem found in daimonicknowledge is the vagueness
of the message. There is no question as to truthfulness of the daimonicmes-
sage, since the god could never lie.53 Socrates can be certain that if he
hears the alarm, he should refrain from the action he was about to do.
However, this alarm tells him very little about three things: (1) when the
action is wrong in future circumstances, (2) which action was wrong, and
(3) what makes the action wrong.
First, outside of the specific time the daimonic alarm sounds,
Socrates is unable to know whether his action is always wrong or just
wrong at that moment. Although he may be able to notice patterns in the
daimonic alarms, even if a certain action caused the alarm to sound 99
times, he could never be certain that he would receive the alarm the next
time. In the Euthydemus, Socrates stands up to leave, but his divine sign
stopped him.54He sits back down which leads him to a philosophical dis-
cussion. Socrates could not conclude anything from the daimonion,
53Apology21b.
54Euthydemus272e.
38 SOCRATICKNOWLEDGEANDTHEDAIMONION
except that it does not want him to leave at that specific moment. He can-
not assume that hours later the daimonion would (or would not) prevent
him from leaving again.
Second, the daimonic alarm does not specify which of Socrates’
actions were offensive. At any given time, Socrates may be doing and
thinking a number of things. Brickhouse and Smith propose, “Socrates
could go through and carefully extract the elements of what he was about
to do and see which element (or elements) was (or were) the offender(s)
by trying them out and seeing which one(s) cause the daimonicalarm to
sound.”55However, they claim that even this process has its flaws. Even the
simplest of human acts contain many elements of thought and move-
ment, each of which could be broken down into subcategories of thought
and movement.
Third, even if Socrates could determine which of his actions is
wrong and when it is wrong, he does not know what makes the action
wrong. Socrates is able to conclude that his death must be good, since the
daimonionwas silent, while at the same time believe he has “no adequate
knowledge of things in the underworld.”56
Once we understand the vagueness of the daimonion, we can under-
stand why Socrates is unable to count it as divine wisdom. As we have
determined, expert moral knowledge must be a craft. However, if we exam-
ine the qualities of a craft or techne, it becomes obvious that no analysis of
a daimonic alarm could give Socrates this type of knowledge. First,
Socrates is unable to teach the knowledge he receives from the daimonion.
When he receives the divine sign, he is unable to know whether the action
would be harmful if another person did it. He cannot teach a person when
a certain action is wrong. He cannot even explain whythe action is wrong,
although he may attempt to make a hypothesis. Each instance of the dai-
monion can only give Socrates information about that specific situation.
Brickhouse and Smith suggest that although Socrates may be able to “gen-
erate a great body of data” after many experiences with the daimonion, the
55Brickhouse and Smith, “The Divine Sign … ” 521.
56Apology29a–b.
D. PHILIPKENNY 39
explanation and analysis is fully within Socrates.57 “Hence, any applica-
tion of what he gets from his daimonion that might count as knowledge
goes well beyond what he actually gets from any of its alarms.”58
Conclusion
At the end of his life, Socrates could stand in front of the jury with
“convincing proof” that his death was a good thing, yet confess his igno-
rance of knowledge. The type of knowledge he searched for was not
human wisdom, which “is worth little or nothing,” but the wisdom that
god has—an expert moral knowledge. Although he could conclude that his
actions leading up to his conviction were according to god’s desire, he had
no way of knowing whyhis death was good. The daimoniongave him guid-
ance throughout his life, helping him to avoid unbeneficial outcomes. It
also provided additional evidence to aid Socrates in his rational decision-
making. However, the daimoniondid not provide the teachable, explicable,
repeatable, expert moral knowledge that Socrates sought.
57Brickhouse and Smith, “The Divine Sign … ” 524.
58Ibid.
References
Beckman, James. The Religious Dimension of Socrates’ Thought. Ontario:
Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1979.
Brickhouse, Thomas C. and Nicholas D. Smith. “The Divine Sign Did
Not Oppose Me: A Problem in Plato's Apology.” Canadian
Journal of Philosophy 16, no. 3 (September 1986): 511–526.
————. “Socrates’ Gods and the Daimonion.” Reason and Religion in
Socratic Philosophy. Ed. Nicholas D. Smith and Paul B.
Woodruff. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Cooper, John M. ed. Plato, Complete Works. Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1997.
Cross, R. Nicol. Socrates: The Man and his Mission. Freeport: Libraries
Press, 1970.
McPherran, Mark L. The Religion of Socrates. University Park: The
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996.
Plato. Alcibiades. Trans. D.S. Hutchinson. Cooper 557–595.
————. Apology. Trans. G.M.A. Grube. Cooper 17–36.
————.Charmides. Trans. Rosamond Kent Sprague. Cooper 639–664.
————. Crito. Trans. G.M.A. Grube. Cooper 37–48.
————. Euthydemus. Trans. Rosamond Kent Sprague. Cooper 708–745.
————. Euthyphro. Trans. G.M.A. Grube. Cooper 1–16.
————. Gorgias. Trans. Donald J. Zehl. Cooper 791–869.
————. Phaedrus. Trans. Alexander Nehamas and Paul Woodruff.
Cooper 506–556.
————. Republic. Trans. G.M.A. Grube, rev. C.D.C. Reeve. Cooper
971–1223.
————. Theaetetus. Trans. M.J. Levett, rev. Myles Burnyeat. Cooper
157–234.
————. Timaeus. Trans. Donald J. Zeyl. Cooper 1224–1291.
Rist, John M. “Plotinus and the Daimonion of Socrates.” Phoenix 17
(1963): 13–24.
Yonezawa, Shigeru. “Socratic Knowledge and Socratic Virtue.” Ancient
Philosophy 15, no. 2 (Fall 1995): 329–338.