AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
On the Significance of Genealogy in Nietzsche’s
Critique of Morality*
CARSTEN KORFMACHER
AT times Nietzsche’s discussion of morality seems to be nothing
more than a confused and polemic attack, a verbal war against tra-
ditional values, quasi-philosophical bombs planted by a “moral ter-
rorist”1—but underlying this apparently arbitrary bombardment of
accusations, I shall argue in this paper, there is to be revealed a
network of explanations of and objections against morality.
Understanding Nietzsche’s attack on morality requires one to make use
of methods similar to those Nietzsche himself employs. Thecreativeactiv-
ity of genealogy, a science of which only Nietzsche’s “readers, [his]right read-
ers, [his] predestined readers”2 are capable, supplies the methodological
means by which Nietzsche’s works are to be made sense of.
Why did Nietzsche investigate into the origin of morality and how is
genealogy related to his overall critique of morality? These questions I
would like to answer in the following.
In order to arrive at a satisfactory answer, one needs to know what
Nietzsche means by the expression ‘morality’ and what his criticisms of it
are. Part I offers a particularly narrow conception of morality, merging
into an outline of Nietzsche’s attack against this conception. Part II out-
*I am indebted to Simon Blackburn and, especially, Raymond Geuss for helpful discussions on
this topic.
1 Danto 18.
2 A, Preface. I have cited Nietzsche’s works using the standard English-language acronyms: The Gay
Science(GS), The Wanderer and His Shadow(WS), Beyond Good and Evil(BGE), On the Genealogy of
Morals (GM), The Antichrist(A), and The Will to Power(WP). Roman numerals refer to major divi-
Carsten Korfmacher is a philosophy undergraduate at the University ofCambridge,
England. He will read for a B.Phil. at Oxford University beginning this fall.
CARSTENKORFMACHER
lines a more general conception that enables us to infer the status of
Nietzsche’s critique (Part III). Part IV will be concerned with the status of
genealogy in Nietzsche’s critique of morality.
I. Morality in the Traditional Sense
There is an obvious way in which Nietzsche uses the term ‘morality’,
namely as referring to what Brian Leiter has called “Morality in the
Pejorative Sense” or traditional morality.
Nietzsche’s discussion of traditional morality commences from two
distinct starting points, which are merged with the introduction of a set of
criteria by which each branch can be measured. The first branch (A) is con-
cerned with the conditions and circumstances under which moral values
arise and develop; the second branch (B) investigates the notion of tradi-
tional morality itself, and is hence concerned with its theoretical implica-
tions and content. I shall discuss each strand in turn.
A. THEGENEALOGICALASPECTSOFTRADITIONALMORALITY
In his Genealogy, Nietzsche is concerned with a particular aspect of
traditional moral values, namely with “the conditions and circumstances in
which they grew.”3
Nietzsche traces the origin of traditional morality back to two juxta-
posed types of human being, which he, provocatively and in his own mean-
ing of the words, calls “slaves” and “masters.” To these two types of man
there correspond two equally juxtaposed moralities,4which are supposed to
shed light on the original meanings of the words ‘good’, ‘bad’, and ‘evil’.
The distinctive character of the master morality in primordial times is
that it evaluates things naturally: there are desirable attributes for a person
to posses, including health, strength, physical attractiveness, and overall
toughness, and a vast number of talents and gifts, such as intelligence,
imagination, genuine creativity, endurance, and stamina. With reference
sions or chapters, Arabic numerals refer to sections.
3 GM, Preface 6.
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
to the corresponding joy and happiness of their possession, persons who
could be characterized by these qualities called themselves ‘good’—
‘good’,therefore, far from having any moral connotation, signifies merely
a positive evaluation of the nature of man as an active, powerful, and
self-affirming individual. The word ‘bad’, the initial antipode of the
expression ‘good’, did not denote more than the lack of these qualities—it
was, as Bergmann remarks, “a lame afterthought,”5occasionally related to
a pitiful, considerate, even regretful benevolence; “finally all the words
referring to the common man have remained as expressions signifying
‘unhappy’, ‘pitiable’.”6 The slaves, characteristically impotent, reactive,
self-negating and weak, tried to free themselves from the imprisonment of
their own inferiority; but due to their lack of creativity, energy, vitality, and
mental and physical health, they hopelessly failed to overcome their lives of
joylessness and misery. Having failed to live up to the master’s own stan-
dards, the slaves’ misery became, against all metaphysical odds and natural
regularities,the mother of creativity: through a “Trojan horse trick of the
disadvantaged,”7the slaves inverted the existing dichotomy of moral val-
ues and construed their enemies as the Evil Ones. The slaves’ valuation
‘evil’ now refers to the people who possess those attributes which for-
merly distinguished the ‘good’—and since the slaves did not possess
those attributes, they were in a position to call themselves ‘good’, only as
opposed to the new primary notion ‘evil’.
This is, according to Nietzsche, the fundamental basis of
nineteenth-century Central European morality. I shall complement
Nietzsche’s portrayal of the origin of traditional morality by adding some
brief comments. First, Nietzsche does not suggest a necessity or hidden
logic in this historical process. The transformation of values into moral
values is purely accidental. Second, it is important to acknowledge the spe-
cial status of Nietzsche’s story: although it is supposed to be part of the
actual history of morality, and is therefore not to be confused with an anal-
ogy or metaphor, it is nevertheless idealized and simplified, reduced to not
4 These two moralities are opposed to each other only in an idealized sense. Any concrete, existing
morality will be a combination of elements from both master and slave moralities.
5Bergmann 30.
6 GM,I.10. Nietzsche employs as examples the (ancient) Greek expressions deilos(cowardly, worth-
CARSTENKORFMACHER
more than rudimentary aspects of past social and political life. An expla-
nation of macro-social phenomena such as morality, in the sense in which
Nietzsche envisages it, requires the construction of what Max Weber
would later call ideal types, which abstract and summarize the common fea-
tures of complexes. Indeed, Nietzsche creates a rhetorical illusion here;
although he describes the clash of two types of people characterized by sets
of fixed dichotomies,8 it would be naive to take Nietzsche’s story entirely
on face value. The history of Western morality can only be understood if
these dichotomies are not seen as fixed and exclusive, but rather as ten-
dencies in character. This point will become evident if we consider the fol-
lowing examples: (1) The slaves are supposed to be neither creative nor
self-affirming. In at least one instance, however, it has been the slaves who
have been creative and self-affirming, namely by inverting the master’s val-
ues and inventing a new moral valuation. (2) The masters, although self-
affirming, powerful, and creative, are not genuinely autarkic. Only through
the pathos of distance are the masters able to create their own positive view
about themselves; they need the slaves in order to feel superior and dis-
tant to them, to look down on them. (3) Moreover, the powerful/weak
dichotomy cannot be held fixed if one wants to understand the impor-
tance of the will to power as the concept that gives life and human action
their content. The concept of power must be understood in such a way
that every instance of power exercises itself in every possible way at every
moment; that is to say, there is no conceptual distinction between the sub-
ject that exercises power and power itself. In the final analysis, therefore,
the slaves are powerful as well. Christianity, then, must be thought of as the
product of a successful exercise of power that has managed to dominate
the morality of human life ever since.
B. THEORETICALIMPLICATIONSANDCONTENT
The following characteristics Nietzsche regards not only as fatal
defects of traditional morality but also as corruptive and dangerous:
(1) Morality’s specific content(for example, antagonism against excel-
less), deilaios(paltry), poneros (good for nothing, knavish), and mochtheros(suffering hardship, knav-
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
lence, selflessness, equality) is not life-enhancing, and hence unten-
able;
(2) Morally dualistic code of evaluation of behavior in terms of posi-
tive/negative dichotomies is untenable;
(3) Morality claims universality in the sense that it is supposed to
apply to all human beings equally;
(4) The obligations and duties imposed by traditional morality on
its followers are supposed to be unconditional, which is equally
untenable.
Nietzsche’s criticisms of traditional morality are most eloquently
delineated if they are contrasted with his own normative code, which I
shall label his morality of the future.
(1) His morality is not so much related to what an agent does but
rather what abilities and characteristics he has. Nietzsche explicitly rejects
the view that there is a fundamental distinction to be made between the
nature of an agent and the nature of the actions he carries out.
Correspondingly, Nietzsche would also have to reject the idea of moral
responsibility. And since an agent will act in accordance with his nature,
Nietzsche cannot advance an actual morality in the form of a set of codes
of behavior. His normative position is necessarily only a description of
actions certain types would act in accordance with anyway because they
cannot act differently.
The fundamental difference between human types expresses itself in
the distinction between ascending and descending, between higher and
lower types of man. The slaves, I suggest, roughly fit the description
‘descending’. The higher type of man, on the contrary, is not without qual-
ifications to be assimilated with the masters. Obviously there will be simi-
larities: physical vitality and healthiness, strength, a yes-saying attitude
towards life, joy, happiness, pleasure, and, to some extent, intelligence.
But the higher man Nietzsche has in mind possesses a variety of other char-
acteristics, some of which the masters did not possess, forexample, intel-
lectual subtlety, cleverness, an expressive genuine creativity, artistic
sensitivity and ability, love for truth, a will to gain knowledge, the ability
not to despair of the truth, and the ability to deal with and gain from hor-
rible experiences and sufferings.
(2) The ascending/descending distinction is not to be understood as
CARSTENKORFMACHER
a dichotomy, but rather as a difference in degree. The distinction expresses
itself in people in “Stufen der Scheinbarkeit…und hellere[n] und dun-
klere[n] Schatten und Gesamttönen des Scheins.”9 Nietzsche’s normative
position, therefore, does not rely upon a moral dualism as traditional
morality characteristically does.
(3) & (4) In a society dominated by traditional morality, the indi-
vidual’s creative force upon morality is remarkably small. On the con-
trary,the normative force to which every member of society is exposed, in
the form of obligations, codes of behavior, and other moral rules and
guidelines, is disproportionally high. The cultural predomination of tradi-
tional morality, therefore, can subtly affect the attitudes
of all members of that culture. This deprives potentially higher man of
opportunities necessary to his development. An individual with the poten-
tial for great achievements might be influenced to believe, for example,
that happiness is good and suffering bad, although suffering is a precondi-
tion for the development of that potential. In pursuing the values
induced by society instead of her own, the individual is likely to waste her
potential. Hence, Nietzsche concludes, traditional morality is alienating,
harmful, and destructive to the development of human excellence.
The morality of the future, on the contrary, since it is subjective and
conditional on the characteristics of the person holding it, does not have
these devastating effects. Getting to hold values is itself a creative activity
and furthers excellence, and since there is a constant re-creation of subjec-
tive norms, older values might be abandoned at some stage. Therefore,
Nietzsche argues, axiological values must not be unconditional or univer-
sal. If they are, they endanger the higher type of man.
According to Nietzsche, since every single component mentioned
above makes a morality a morality in the traditional sense, all these fea-
tures must be eliminated. It is not sufficient to eliminate only one
or the other of the traditional constituents.
II. Morality as a Cultural Phenomenon
I wish to bring into discussion a distinction emphasized by Brian
ish), each of which means “wretched” in addition to their other connotations.
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
Leiter, namely the distinction between Morality10 as a cultural phenomenon
and moral theory.11Nietzsche is not so much interested in any systematized
and improved theoretical framework to which morality isreduced.Indeed,
it seems evident that Nietzsche denies the possibility of any such reduc-
tion. Nietzsche is rather interested in how morality influences human
beings and their ways of forming beliefs and justifying conduct, how moti-
vations for actions are created by morality and, indeed, how morality is
created by human beings—not as a system of thought but as a, partly
unconscious, psychological expression of certain types of people and the
distinctive concentration of their wills.
This distinction helps us to see how Nietzsche’s general perception
of morality is to be understood. As a cultural phenomenon, Morality is
inevitably a historical concept and, for Nietzsche, “only that which has no
history is definable.”12 Hence, Nietzsche concludes, there is no defining
(set of) necessary and sufficient condition(s) by which concepts of morality
can be identified as concepts of morality, “as if all words were not pockets
into which now this and now that has been put, and now many things at
once.”13Rather, different concepts of morality are “best connected to each
other by ‘family resemblances,’ and there are no antecedently specifiable
limits to what can count as sufficient ‘resemblance’ to make the term
‘morality’ correctly applicable.”14 Nietzsche is, therefore, an anti-essential-
ist with regards to the concept of morality.
Even though it has by itself no specific content, origin, internal struc-
ture, motivational property, or social function, there will be in any society at
any given time a cultural phenomenon that might appropriately be called
Morality. It seems hence plausible to suggest that, in its widest sense,
Morality cannot be rejected in much the same way sociability cannot be
rejected from within a society. Morality is an empty concept that is actu-
alized by particular sets of values. Traditional morality, then, is not a
wider or different set of values, but rather a summarizing term for all par-
7 Bergmann 30.
8 Arguably, the most essential dichotomies are: active/reactive, affirmative/negating, genuinely
creative/not creative, and powerful/weak.
9 “Degrees of apparentness…and lighter and darker shadows and shades of appearance.” BGE,
§34.
10 In the following, the capitalized term ‘Morality’ refers to morality as a cultural phenomenon,
CARSTENKORFMACHER
ticular actualizations of Morality which involve one or more of the
criticisms mentioned above. Since Christianity is the origin of
Western morality, its moral code is, for us, the paradigmatic instance of
traditional morality.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to list a number of meanings
Nietzsche has reserved for the term ‘morality’—in Nietzsche’s writings, for
reasons I have just advanced, ‘morality’ can literally mean anything
between Judeo-Christian morality and Morality as a cultural phenomenon.
Nietzsche’s employment of the expression is entirely context-dependent.
Nevertheless, if one is determined to understand Nietzsche’s critique of
morality, it is of major importance to identify the sense in which Nietzsche
uses the term ‘morality’ on any particular occasion.
III. The Status of Nietzsche’s Analysis of Traditional Morality
These considerations help us to understand the status of Nietzsche’s
critical analysis of traditional morality. Since Nietzsche argues against nei-
ther a definable concept nor a moral theory, he does not attempt to
employ a formal objection against traditional morality. First of all,
Nietzsche does not have any objection to falsity or untruth simpliciter. States
of affairs can rest upon false assumptions or metaphysical claims, but never-
theless further life—and the latter is the criterion by which justification for
existence can be measured. And, second, since there is no one fixed (set
of) proposition(s) traditional morality iscommitted to in every form at all
times, there is no one formal objection which is sufficient to refute tradi-
tional morality. Therefore, by his own standards, formal objections do not
help Nietzsche at all, or, as he famously proclaims, “What have I to do
with refutations!”15 Nietzsche’s project is necessarily empirical, his aim is
“to replace the improbable with the more probable, possibly one error
with another.”16
Therefore, Nietzsche’s objections outlined above are to be thought
of as a case, not as a set of formal objections, against “all that has hitherto
i.e., to an abstract social category. As an abstractum the notion lacks a normative dimension, and
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
been celebrated on earth as morality.”17His criticisms reveal that the type
of people who hold traditional moral values do so due to weakness, dis-
ability, and misunderstanding. And since traditional morality perverts
life, since it is dangerous, subversive, self-abnegating, and self-sacrific-
ing, in short, since it hinders life instead of furthering it, traditional
moral values must be rejected.
IV. The Status of Genealogy in the Critique of Morality
We are now in a position to delineate the status of genealogy in the
morality critique. Nietzsche’s genealogical investigation serves a variety of
purposes in the corpus of his writings on morality, and it is vital to
acknowledge this diversity in order to understand how it complements
his general “cultural” critique.
(A) First, as a minor function, genealogy is part of Nietzsche’s project of
disentangling the complex notion of morality, and is in this sense prelim-
inary to metaethical discourse in the Nietzschean sense. Due to his anti-
essentialism and his commitment to morality as a social institution rather
than a theoretical framework, Nietzsche must devote a part of his discus-
sion to the clarification of the object of analysis before he will be in a posi-
tion to treat morality as an object of philosophical discourse. In this
sense, genealogy is not a process of evaluation but rather a process of pro-
viding a basis of explanation.
(B) Second, Nietzsche’s genealogy, I would like to suggest, has differ-
ent functions depending on the type of personwho is confronted with it. For
followers of traditional morality, the genealogical functions as the revela-
tion of a real problem, a problem concerning morality that has been over-
looked for centuries. This problem is “something much more important
than hypothesis-mongering…on the origin of morality.… What [is] at
stake [is] the valueof morality.”18The second function of the genealogical
analysis, then, facilitates Nietzsche’s project that “the value of these
[moral] values themselves must first be called into question.”19 In other
words, Nietzsche’s genealogy of morality is supposed to undermine the
is by itself both contentless and irrefutable.
11 See Leiter, “Nietzsche” 252.
CARSTENKORFMACHER
apparently obvious connotations we associate with moral values and to
demonstrate that traditional morality itself is just “a special case of
immorality.”20 Nietzsche regarded himself as the first thinker to go
beyond traditional ethical discourse in the sense that he does not take the
value of moral values—i.e., their traditional connotations—for granted.
For followers of traditional morality these connotations are essential
and undermining them, by showing that they are inconsistent with one
another, equals undermining traditional morality itself. Therefore, even
though genealogical analysis has for Nietzsche a different function, he
nevertheless regarded its result as an important motivation for Christians
to gradually turn against their own beliefs.
It is important not to confuse this second function with an actual
objection against morality. Nietzsche has frequently been misinterpreted
in two ways:
(1) A number of critics have attributed to Nietzsche the view that
since traditional morality arises out of immorality, it possesses therefore
only negative value, and must hence be rejected. This interpretation has
then been used to object against Nietzsche that by moving from the ori-
gin of traditional morality to its value, he commits a genetic fallacy. I do
not think that this interpretation is successful. Nietzsche is aware of this
fallacy and explicitly says, in a work published before the Genealogy was
written, that traditional morality “is completely independent…from the
weeds of error with which it was perhaps overgrown.”21Furthermore, “To
object to morality simply because it relies on immoral means would
be...to make yet another moral judgment”22from the point of view of tra-
ditional moral valuation. Consequently, if Nietzsche thought of his geneal-
ogy as an objection in this sense, he would have presupposed traditional
moral values and his investigation was straightforwardly self-defeating. I
should suggest that attributing such a blunt fallacy to one of morality’s
most brilliant critics brusquely trivializes Nietzsche’s point.
(2) It has also frequently been argued that Nietzsche advances an inter-
nal critique of traditional morality here: since traditional morality arises out
12 GM,II.13.
13 WS,§33.
14 Geuss 167.
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
of immorality, it must be internally fallacious or inconsistent. I do not think
that this interpretation does justice to Nietzsche’s intentions: as already
stated, even if morality were inconsistent, Nietzsche would not have a par-
ticular problem with it, for not consistency but the enhancement of life is
the criterion of justification Nietzsche employs. Moreover, Nietzsche’s own
normative position is based on the thought that the more advanced incom-
patible strands of different moralities are developed within a person or soci-
ety, the more ethically sophisticated the person or society is. Therefore, if
Nietzsche argues against traditional morality because it is inconsistent, he
would have to acknowledge the inconsistency, and hence invalidity, of his
own morality—but he explicitly does not. Finally, inconsistency is a
notion that can meaningfully be applied to moral or metaethical theo-
ries, but not, as Nietzsche discusses it, to Morality as a cultural phenome-
non. To reduce Nietzsche’s objection against morality to an internal
critique, therefore, is to ignore the most substantial part of his criticisms,
namely the dimension of cultural critique.
(C) Third, I shall argue that genealogy lies at the heart of Nietzsche’s
critique in the sense that it serves as an experimental explanationin the way
Nietzsche envisages it for the philosophers of the future.23 Nevertheless,
genealogy is logically separated from Nietzsche’s overall criticisms. This fact
has led to much confusion in contemporary Nietzsche scholarship, so it
seems worth elaboration.
Tracing the history of morality gives an indication that traditional
morality opposes higher men as Nietzsche envisages them—but this could
have been known also by just identifying mid-nineneenth century Western
morality’s incompatibility with the life of higher men. Strictly speaking,
therefore, a natural history of morality is not necessary to criticize moral-
ity on Nietzschean grounds.
It seems more plausible to suggest that genealogy arose, for Nietzsche
and other free spirits not imprisoned in the dungeon of traditional moral-
ity, out of a special interest, initially remote from his overall critique of
morality. This special interest evolved from the question, “How could
humanity have been deceived for almost two millennia, deceived by such a
dangerous, sick, and subversive phenomenon?” Far from being supposed
CARSTENKORFMACHER
to criticize, to object, and to finally reject morality, genealogy “is meant to
supplement and clarify”24 Nietzsche’s analysis and critique of morality.
Genealogical investigation into the history of traditional morality, then,
serves as an explanation of whymoral values endanger the ascending type
of man, rather than constituting evidence for the fact that they endanger
him. Tracing the origin of morality reveals the deeply rooted opposition
of traditional morality to all genuinely creative, individual, and self-
affirming beings, and hence explains how morality became and remained
“the danger of dangers.”25
It is important to stress the predicate ‘experimental’ in this context.
Nietzsche does not claim that his Genealogyalready is a unified account of
the origin of morality. Rather, Nietzsche’s genealogy is an ongoing and
continuous attempt to gain an understanding of morality and is to be con-
tinued by the philosophers of the future.26This is not done by applying a
fixed methodology, but methods from a wide range of sciences includ-
ing psychology, philology, and physiology. Therefore, the creation of new
well-supported hypotheses in psychology or physiology can influence a
genealogical investigation in the same way a discovery of historical facts
can. In this sense, genealogy is not to be thought of as purely historical;
it rather includes history as a possibility of investigation.
Genealogy, then, complements, illuminates, and supports Nietzsche’s
analysis and criticisms of traditional morality. Equally, his morality of the
future and the corresponding criticisms of traditional morality illumi-
nate the genealogical investigation. According to Nietzsche, from the per-
spective of his morality of the future, his genealogy is a historically more
successful and accurate account of the origin of traditional morality
than could be achieved from the view point of traditionalmorality.
Genealogy of morality and analysis of morality, therefore, stand in a
continuous dialectical relation, which the philosopher of the future is sup-
posed to explore. Only in treating the relation between genealogy and
analysis as a productive circle of mutual illumination, according to
Nietzsche, is an insight into the nature and complexity of human states of
affairs possible.
15 GM, Preface 4.
16 GM, Preface 4.
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
NIETZSCHE’SCRITIQUEOFMORALITY
17 GM, Preface 3.
18 GM, Preface 5.
19 GM, Preface 6.
20 WP, 308; see 401, 406.
21 GS, §345.
22 Nehamas 201.
23 See BGE,§42.
24 Following the title page of the first edition of GM.
25 GM, Preface 6.
26 See GM, Preface 6.
References
Bergmann, Frithjof. “Nietzsche’s Critique of Morality.” Reading Nietzsche.
Ed. R. Solomon and K. Higgins. Oxford: University Press, 1988.
29–45.
Danto, Arthur. “Some Remarks on The Genealogy of Morals.”
International Studies in Philosophy 18, no. 2 (1986): 3–15.
Geuss, Raymond. Morality, Culture, and History. Cambridge: University
Press, 1999.
Leiter, Brian. “Morality in the Pejorative Sense: On the Logic of
Nietzsche’s Critique of Morality.” British Journal of Philosophy 3
(1995): 113–45.
______. “Nietzsche and the Morality Critics.” Ethics107 (1997): 250–85.
Nehamas, Alexander. Nietzsche: Life as Literature. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1985.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Antichrist. In The Portable Nietzsche. Ed. Walter
Kaufmann. New York: The Viking Press, 1954.
———. Beyond Good and Evil. Trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random
House, 1966.
———. Jenseits von Gut und Boese und Zur Genealogie der Moral. KSA 5. Ed.
G. Colli and M. Montinari. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1999.
———. On the Genealogy of Moralsand Ecce Homo. Trans. Walter Kaufmann.
New York: Random House, 1989.