Ajjoria Vol. 10 number 1,2000
The Moral Limits of State Action in Kant's
Metaphysics of Morals
Matthew Leavitt
In Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, Kant identifies and
establishes the Categorical Imperative, the law to which all maxims of
action must conform if they would be moral. In The Metaphysics of Morals
Kant moves on to practically apply the principles that underlie moral
action, principles that ground moral laws such as the Categorical
Imperative. "All lawgiving can...be distinguished with respect to the
incentive" or the connection between the subject and the law, Kant says
(Metaphysics 20). Moral law may make the incentive for action the fact
that the action is a duty, in which case the law is an ethical law; if the
incentive is something other than duty, the law is "juridical." The latter
will be the topic of this paper. Juridical laws, Kant goes on to explain, are
those that command externally, or those that can be made into public law
(Metaphysics 17, 20-21). Thus, the actions and lawmaking of the state are
governed by moral law, as are individual actions. To further specify my
topic, then, I will explore how Kant applies moral principles to state
actions and how he determines what actions the state is morally permitted
to take against individuals.
A key concept at the heart of this discussion is that of" freedom" as
Kant uses the word. Whether or not certain actions infringe upon the
freedom of individuals will determine whether they are morally permissible.
Allen D. Rosen argues in his book Kant's Theory ofJ ustice that Kant allows
the state a wide range of positive action, including taxing the wealthy in
order to care for the needy. Such action is justified by a state duty of
Matthew Leavitt is a senityr majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University.
He plans to pursue graduate studies in political philosophy and public policy. This essay
was awarded second place in the 2000 David H. Yam Philosophical Essay Competition.
2 MATTHEW LEAVITT
beneficence, derived from the purpose of its existence. Yet such action can
be taken, in Rosen's view, without ever infringing on individual freedom.
I will argue that Rosen misinterprets passages of Kant and thus arrives at
his (false) conclusions. The state has no duty of beneficence. It exists in
order to protect individual rights and guarantee justice. These ends can be
met only if the united will rationally determines the action that the state
can take.
Kant and Freedom
Kant's concept off reedom is the focal point for the discussion of moral
law within the state. He will claim that freedom is the basis for the possibility
oft he Categorical Imperative (Metaphysics 15). Therefore,e very maxim
that aspires to become moral law must conform to the principles off reedom
first before it can be willed universally. The principles of freedom apply
equally to every person, thus providing the basis for universal moral law.
The Categorical Imperative reflects this universality; no maxim can be
moral law until it can be willed universally, until it is assured that the
maxim can coexist with the freedom ofe verybody. What are the principles
off reedom that Kant holds so sacred? They are twofold:( 1)E quality—no
one can be coerced to do more than any other( Metaphysics 29-30).I n other
words, the same moral laws apply for all people; nobody is exempt from
morality, nor is anyone held to a higher standard.( 2) This principle could
be called liberty (Kant gives it no name). The essence of this principle
is that any action that does not infringe upon the rights (the will or
property) of others is consistent with freedom, although it may not be
morally required (Metaphysics 30). Some actions are "merely permitted,
since there is no law limiting one's freedom with regard to it and so too
no duty"( Metaphysics 15).
Every person is equally free for every person is rational (Grounding
49-50). Our rationality frees us from having our actions determined by
external or emotional impulses( Metaphysics 13). Kant calls this a negative
concept of freedom, contrasting it with a positive concept. We are free in
the positive sense when everybody subjects his or her maxims of action
to the Categorical Imperative. Moral action ensures that every person is
treated with respect, in other words, that every one's rights are respected.
Thus, moral action contributes to a state where every person is free from
unjust coercion (Metaphysics 13-14). So, positive freedom, the sense that
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 3
applies directly to moral law, necessitates conformity to the Categorical
Imperative. If the state hopes to create a civil society where individuals
can be free, the state itself must first subject its maxims to the principles
off reedom.
In the following discussions, all reference to freedom will refer to the
two principles just outlined. These must be accounted for in every case
determining the morality of actions. At times I also use the term "right" or
"principles of right." Right is essentially equivalent to freedom, but slightly
broader. Freedom, Kant explains, is our only natural right (Metaphysics
29-30). Yet a person may also have a right to property. Any action affecting
property that creates disputes about ownership can be settled by applying
the principles off reedom.
Rosen and State Beneficence
The main argument that Rosen wishes to make is that the state has a
duty of beneficence that corresponds to the individual duty of beneficence.
In this way the state is a moral being. From this it follows that the state
necessarily must take positive action, in the form of taxation, to assist
those in need. Since the state's positive actions are grounded in an ethical
duty (a categorical imperative) they cannot, by definition, violate the
freedom of the citizens.
Rosen argues that it is irrational to conceive of a civil state in which
the people do not desire that the state be able to assist any needy individual
(200-01). He draws upon Kant's argument in Grounding for the
Metaphysics of Morals that a rational individual cannot rationally will a
maxim of non-beneficence( Rosen 198-202; cf. Grounding 423).T his argu
ment concludes that individuals must rationally have an ethical duty to
assist others in need,f or no one can rationally will to live completely inde
pendently of the assistance of others. It is simply not reasonable to believe
that any person can go throughout life and never have need oft he help that
another can offer. If we were to will a universal law of non-beneficence,
when moments of need arose we would have contradicted our rational
desire for help. Therefore, concludes Kant, beneficence must be rationally
willed a moral duty.
What Rosen wants to say is that when the united will creates the
state, it gives the legislator the authority to take measures to help needy
citizens. In his own words, "We ask whether an entire people could
4 MATTHEW LEAVITT
rationally agree to a positive law that stipulated that the state should do
nothing to provide for the needs of citizens or even ensure their survival if
they were unable to do so themselves. The argument in the Groundwork
suggests that the answer is no"( 200). Rosen is not saying that the state must
preserve each citizen because the preservation of individuals is necessary for
the preservation oft he united will( state). Rather,t o rationally justify a state
duty of beneficence one must correlate the nature of the united will with
what individuals rationally will. The united will is the collective individual
wills of the citizens, or what each and every citizen wills. It is not dependent
on the survival of every citizen, but only on whethet every citizen wills
the same maxims to become universal law. So if every citizen tationally
wills maxim X,t hat maxim makes up part oft he united will. Any non-universal
maxim does not comprise part of the united will. Each individual rationally
wills his or her own preservation—desires state help in time of need—
and thus the united will includes the law that every citizen be preserved
by the state when the citizen cannot provide for himselfo r herself.
Yet, for his purposes, Rosen must do more than just show that it is
rationally conceivable that the state be created with a duty ofb eneficence.
What he must show is that Kant viewed such a duty as necessary for ful
filling the state's purposes. If the state does not exist to take positive
action for the welfare of citizens then the rationality argument is certainly
less relevant, if not unfounded. He must also demonstrate that a state duty
of beneficence is consistent with the principles off reedom. Supposing that
the purpose of the state permits such positive action, still, the measures
that the state implements must always respect the freedom of individual
citizens. The good of some cannot be promoted at the expense of the
freedom of others. Such action violates the most basic of Kant's moral
principles (Metaphysics 15).
Why must the purpose oft he state necessitate a duty ofb eneficence? In
other words, what necessary role would the state be unable to fill without a
duty of beneficence? Obviously it would be unable to care for the poor itself;
but is this Kant's purpose for the state, to ensure the temporal needs of the
people? To answer this question, Rosen draws from Kant's essay "Perpetual
Peace"( 181-86;" Perpetual"3 10-11).T he pas,sage that Rosen cites seems to
make explicit the end towards which the state's actions should be directed.
Kant appears to create a political Categorical Imperative that guides legisla
tors' maxims so that their actions accord with the state's purpose. The
imperative serves to harmonize ethics with politics, in Rosen's view.
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 5
Kant says that the "proper task of politics is to promote [the citi
zens' happiness]" ("Perpetual" 311). The public laws that the state
enacts must fulfill two duties in order to satisfy this end. Public laws must
serve some sort of ethical duty, what Kant calls "philanthropy" and
Rosen equates with beneficence ("Perpetual" 310; Rosen 183). The eth
ical duty, though, is subordinate to the duty to uphold individual rights
("Perpetual" 310). Subsequently, any public law that cannot serve some
charitable purpose without violating individual rights cannot fulfill the
purpose of the state.
Rosen interprets this portion of "Perpetual Peace" to mean that
the state has a definite duty to provide for the temporal welfare of the
citizens. Promoting happiness involves positive action, always within
the bounds off reedom.T he answer to the question oft he necessity ofa state
duty of beneficence is this: an ethical duty not only allows for the state to
benefit the citizens, but it serves to focus the actions of the state as well.
Since public law must fulfill an ethical duty, the state's actions are confined
or concentrated on the welfare of the people. Frivolous or non-beneficial
laws are avoided if they do not directly satisfy the duty of beneficence.T he
end oft he happiness oft he people is kept at the forefront oft he state's deci
sion making. The ethical duty that most clearly satisfies the imperative to
promote happiness is beneficence, a claim that is supported further by a
second passage, this one in The Metaphysics of Morals.
Whereas the previous passage clarifies Rosen's view of Kant's purpose
for politics, the end for which it should strive, this passage spells out the state's
rights in working for that end.T he passage from "Doctrine ofR ight" begins as
follows:" To the supreme commander there belongs...i nsofar as he has taken
over the duty oft he people,t he right to impose taxes on the people for its own
preservation,s uch as taxes to support organizations providing for...c haritable
orpious institutions"( Metaphysics 100-01).
Clearly, Kant recognizes a state right to tax for the purpose of assisting
the needy. This right exists as a result of a duty possessed by the supreme
commander (legislator, sovereign). Once again, Rosen identifies this duty
as a duty of beneficence. It is not so much "taken over" as it is equivalent
to the ethical duty each individual possesses, Rosen explains. It appears
then, that the state as an independent entity is a rational/moral individual
on par with individual people within the state. It has the same obligations
and duties as any person, and has them for achieving the same ends:
preservation or happiness.T he apparent difference between the state duty
6 MATTHEW LEAVITT
of beneficence and the duty of an individual person lies in the means that
can lawfully he used to bring about that end. The state is given the license
to coercively tax the wealthy for the benefit oft he needy. Individuals must
fulfill their duty non-coercively. Rather, the two legitimate (rightful)
uses of coercion that Kant explains do not include coercion as a mean of
fulfilling an individual's ethical duty (Metaphysics 24-26).
Why is it that the state can use coercion to fulfill its ethical duties
when this clearly seems to violate the freedom of those who are coerced.
Rosen explains that positive/coercive action by the state in the form of
taxation for charitable causes does not violate individual freedom (204).
The popular will elected the legislator (to whom the right to tax belongs)
and consequently also tacitly approved a suspension of personal freedom.
That is, election of the official entails approval of the official's policy of
coercive taxation. Therefore, he concludes, the people are not subjected
to unjust laws, but voluntarily restrict their own freedom.
In summary, Rosen interprets Kant so as to establish three points
regarding the state and the permissibility of state actions.( 1) The united
will creates the state for the purpose of guaranteeing the temporal welfare
of the individual citizens.( 2) State duties include a duty of beneficence.
Public laws and state actions must reflect this duty by serving some
charitable end while always honoring the freedom and rights ofi ndividuals.
The purpose of the state is ditectly linked to the duties that the state
possesses in such a way that its duties are necessary for meeting its end.
And (3), the state's duty of beneficence permits it to coercively tax the
wealthy in order to provide for the needy, and such action does not violate
the ptinciples off reedom.
Alternative Interpretation
Although the passages that Rosen cites can reasonably be interpreted
to reach these conclusions, he neglects many other, more explicit pas
sages that lead to a very different set of conclusions. Regarding the purpose
and origin of the state, Kant explains quite clearly that it arises as a way of
securing individual rights, not to provide a source of welfare. This claim
leads us to question whether a duty of beneficence is consistent with its
purpose or even necessary for the existence of the state. The evidence that
Rosen provides to support such a duty may be misinterpreted. In fact, his
justification for coercive state action is quite un-Kantian. 1 will attempt to
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 7
provide an alternative interpretation of the limits of state action by
examining the possible consequences of a state duty of beneficence. 1
argue that Rosen's understanding of such a duty is actually inconsistent
with Kant's concept off reedom.
Purpose of the State
The civil state exists in otder to secure individual rights, not to provide
for the welfare of the people or ensure their happiness, as Rosen claims. It
may be that happiness is attained by securing rights, but this is not how
Rosen views happiness. His argument is that the state is to promote the
happiness of the people by providing for their temporal needs, that is,
fulfilling its duty of beneficence. But the context of "Perpetual Peace"
does not suggest a specific duty like beneficence, but rather affirms, more
simply, that the state should not oppose the interests of the people.
In the section of" Perpetual Peace" cited by Rosen, Kant is trying to
reconcile politics with morality broken into its divisions of ethics and
right ("Perpetual" 306-10). In what sounds like a historical account, Kant
suggests that politics typically disregards the rights of people, justifying its
action by claiming a duty of beneficence. In other words, a state duty of
beneficence may allow the state to assist people, but at the expense of their
rights." Politics readily agrees with morality in its first branch (as ethics) in
order to surrender the rights of men to their superiors. But with morality
in the second branch (as a science of right), to which it must bend its
knee, politics finds it advisable not to have any dealings, and rather denies
it all reality, preferring to reduce all duties to mere benevolence"
("Perpetual" 310). The people become dependent upon the state and cease
to see the violations of their rights by the state. This is not meant to imply
that the state should not assist people. Instead, it should assist them to
some degree because it would be wrong to harm or oppose them. Yet at the
same time, the principles off reedom must be respected. So,i nstead ofg iving
the state a specific duty, one that prescribes certain actions, Kant is merely
saying that it is the duty of the state to ensure that the laws it enacts meet
two conditions:( 1) laws must be for the benefit of the people; and (2)
laws must not violate individual rights. If both conditions are met,
happiness is certainly promoted.
It is perplexing, though, that Kant says forthrightly that the end of
politics is to make individuals happy if this is not to be understood literally.
0 MATTHEW LEAVITT
We find additional support for the claim that the purpose of the state cannot
be the temporal welfare (happiness) of the people in the first paragraphs of
the Metaphysics (9). If morality taught principles of happiness it would be
an entirely subjective (and relative) pursuit. The maxims of action that
lead to one person's happiness certainly do not apply to everybody.
Additionally, we leam how to be happy through experience, trial and
error. We leam and err and formulate guidelines that generally lead us to
maximize our pleasure. But moral law functions very differently for Kant.
Moral laws are universal in their applicability, unconditional in their
commanding,a nd a priori in their origin. How does this comparison relate
to the question of the purpose of the state?
Moral laws apply equally to individuals and to the state. That is, the
state can be considered moral or immoral; the state can obey or neglect its
moral duties. Therefore, the moral laws that apply to political states are not
subjective, nor can they be judged good,o r just( in any sense) based on how
they benefit citizens in purely subjective pursuits. This claim rests on the
common sense premise that freedom and rationality apply equally well to
all people. That is, no state can violate citizens'f reedom claiming that the
principles off reedom do not inherently apply to them.
A final argument for why Rosen misinterprets the purpose oft he state
in his analysis of" Perpetual Peace" is that Kant contrasts a civil state with
a state of nature in terms of rights. Speaking of civil states Kant says," A
state is a union of a multitude of human beings under laws of right"
(Metaphysics 90). Likewise," a civil constitution is just the rightful condition,
by which what belongs to each is only secured, but not actually settled and
determined"( Metaphysics 45). In a state of nature, though people may live
civilly, rights to external objects are never secured. That is, if a dispute
over rights arose there would be no means by which it could be civilly
settled. There is no law that serves to judge the actions of people.
When Kant says that the civil state is not the condition where what
belongs to us( what we have a right to) is "actually settled and determined"
he answers a possible objection to the point just made. He has claimed
that the civil state exists to secure rights, not to satisfy material needs.
Kant defends this claim saying the state does not have a responsibility to
determine what objects we have a right to, nor do we have any natural
right to any object (Metaphysics 47). A natural right to an object would
obligate others—including the state—to provide us with that object.
Instead we acquire a right to an object through control of the object for
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 9
practical use, always obeying the laws off reedom (Metaphysics 47). If we do
not have a natural right to any object,t he state cannot have any ethical duty
to provide us with any object. The fact that the object may be necessary for
our survival does not change this fact, however cruel that may appear.
The state exists, therefore, to enact laws that make up a just or rightful
society. That is, public laws in accordance with moral laws define the limits
of rightful behavior, for individuals and for the state. The state's duty is,
therefore, to ensure that the rights of individuals are protected, which
involves administering punishment for violations of those rights
(Metaphysics 104-07). The priority of rights in a civil state is once again
made clear in the following passage which appears immediately prior to
Kant's discussion of the actions that the state is justified in taking.
A state's well-being consists in [the three branches of govemment:
legislative, executive, judicial] being united. By the well-being of a
state must not be understood the welfare of its citizens and their hap
piness— By the well-being of a state is understood, instead, that
condition in which its constitution conforms most fully to principles
ofr ight; it is that condition which reason, by a categorical imperative,
makes it obligatory for us to strive after.( Metaphysics 94-95)
The United Will and State Action
1 have established that in Kant's view the civil state exists to protect
individual rights, not to provide welfare to the needy. But does this view
eliminate any possibility of state-provided assistance to the needy? Is the
state morally obligated to remain totally impartial to citizens' needs? If not,
then what actions is the state morally justified in taking? By justified I
mean, what actions will give absolute priority to rights while still serving
some beneficial end. The answer is yes, the state is both morally and
rationally justified in taking positive action in benefit of the needy,
granted a specific condition is met first. 1 will show how Kant allows for
this by criticizing Rosen's defense of a state duty of beneficence against a
particular objection.
Rosen defends a state duty of beneficence by arguing against the
objection that such a duty inevitably violates the freedom of those who are
taxed (203-04). In making his defense, he assumes that in a Kantian
10 MATTHEW LEAVITT
State, the legislative officials are elected by popular vote, by a majority.
We are familiar with such a system of election and thus know that elected
officials govern through popular consent. When we elect a legislative offi
cial, we also elect, in a sense, the policies endorsed by the official. Thus,
the policies of popularly elected officials reflect the will of the majority.
These premises lead Rosen to the conclusion that freedom is not violated
by a duty of beneficence that allows the state to freely tax the wealthy.
Instead, the people voluntarily surrender a portion of their freedom when
they elect legislative officials (204).
This argument, as applied to Kant, is clearly unsound. In Kant's
writings he never makes reference to the popular will, and certainly moral
law does not derive from majority election. Instead, as Kant states," The
legislative authority can belong only to the united will of the people"
(Metaphysics 91). So, what does this mean—the legislative authority
"belongs" to the united will?
The most reasonable interpretation is that the legislator's actions
reflect the united will. Juridical lawgiving is the duty of the legislator or
sovereign authority (Metaphysics 94). The laws that are enacted by the
legislator demark the limits ofj uridical or legal duties, which are equivalent
to moral imperatives.S o what is the link between the (united or individual)
will and moral imperatives? Our subjective, often immoral, maxims of
action are the generalities we follow when we make choices. In order that
our choices( our maxims of action) be moral we must apply practical reason.
Our faculty of reason allows us to determine whether our maxims can
coexist with universal freedom. If they do, we will that such a maxim
become practical (moral) law. Practical laws, such as public laws within a
state, are principles that define duties in terms of actions and proceed from
the will( Metaphysics 17-18). Therefore, the transition between subjective
maxims and objective laws is made by the principles of freedom. The
command of a public law is universal; that is, the duty applies to every
citizen equally because every person wills freedom. In this sense, the public
laws enacted by the legislator are reflections of every citizen willing certain
actions to become categorical imperatives.
There is another, clearer, sense in which the legislative authority
"belongs" to the united will. Every citizen is equally free (has equal rights).
Yet positive freedom is possible only by subjecting our maxims of action to
the Categorical Imperative. In Kant's words, "The positive concept of
freedom is... not possible except by the subjection of the maxim of every
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 11
action to the condition of its qualifying as universal law"( Metaphysics 13).
What this means is that if a maxim ofa ction—a public law,f or instance—
can be universally willed as law it will not violate any one citizen's freedom.
Moral laws are based on the possibility of universal positive freedom. If a
maxim cannot be categorically made into law it cannot totally obey freedom.
We only need ask whether all citizens can rationally will the maxim of
coercive taxation by the state. Clearly the poor would not rationally
will this maxim, and certainly not if their money went to benefit the
wealthy. Therefore, coercive taxation cannot be a universal moral law;
it violates freedom.
Positive state action on behalfo ft he needy is possible with the consent
of the united will. "Only the concurring and united will of all, insofar as
each decides the same thing for all and all for each, and so only the general
united will of the people, can be legislative"( Metaphysics 91). Two points
ofs ignificance arise from this passage. First, the legislative authority is not
a separate entity from the will oft he people,a lthough the people's will may
be expressed through a representative. But the legislator does not act as a
monarch might, for instance, detached from the interests and opinion of
the people. Moral legislative decisions—decisions that respect universal
freedom and individual rights—are made only through the people, not
without or in spite of their will.
Secondly, by and large, the state allows people to act for themselves
and to pursue their own ends. The state, as has been shown, exists to
ensure that the rights of the citizens are protected, and when violations
occur, the state acts as judge to restore justice. Yet, when the need for
positive state action arises, only the united will of the people can decide
whether such action can be taken. Positive actions, like taxation, do not
always have freedom as their end. For positive social action to be taken,
the united will must first express its consent. The conclusion here is that
when Kant says that the state has a right to tax the wealthy for the benefit of
the poor,t his is a logical possibility, not a free license. Requiring the united
consent of the people promotes the happiness and well-being of all the
people while fulfilling the state's greater priority of protecting individual
rights. This view seems logical (and ethical) yet somewhat impractical
since our democratic society functions contrary to the kind of state Kant
is trying to create. Most democratic states function to some degree according
to the will of the majority, not purely rational principles. In this way, Kant
is advocating neither a minimalist state nor a socialist state.
12 MATTHEW LEAVITT
Kant's view of morally permissible actions by the state conforms to
the Categorical Imperative—any action that is to be moral must be able
to be willed as universal law. What 1 have attempted to show is that the
principles of freedom underlie the Categorical Imperative and help to
restrict state actions to protecting individual rights. Rosen argues that
coercive taxation of the wealthy to assist the needy is a moral duty of the
state, and therefore poses no threat to freedom. But my criticism of his
arguments has shown that he misinterprets key passages of Kant dealing
with freedom, and incorrectly gives the state such a duty. Kant views the
state functioning through the united will, that is, what every citizen
rationally wills. The limit of moral state action extends not to positive
action sanctioned by the popular vote, but must conform to the united
voice of the people.
THE MORAL LIMITS OF STATE ACTION 13
Works Cited
Kant, Immanuel. Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals. Trans. James W.
Ellington. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co., Inc., 1993.
n The Metaphysics of Morals. Ed. Mary Gregor. Cambridge:
Cambridge UP, 1996.
_." Perpetual Peace." Immanuel Kant: Philosophical Writings. Ed. Ernst
Behler. New York: Continuum Publishing Co., 1986.270-311.
Rosen, Allen D. Kant's Theory ofJ ustice. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993.