Aporia vol. 21 no. 2—2011
Reductive Explanation and Qualia
Andrew Lee
Qualia are the intrinsic, subjective qualities of experience—the what-
is-likeness, the raw feels. Reductive explanation is the functional
explanation of a higher-level property in terms of lower-level proper-
ties. If qualia can be given a reductive explanation, then this would bridge
the explanatory gap between the phenomenal and the physical. In this pa-
per, I argue that no such reductive explanation could exist.1 In Section I, I
give an account of reductive explanation. In Section II, I argue that qualia
cannot be reductively explained. In Section III, I consider what epistemo-
logical and ontological implications this has for qualia, emphasizing that
failure of reductive explanation by itself establishes only an epistemological
conclusion.
I.Reductive Explanation2
Roughly, a reductive explanation explains a higher-level property in
terms of lower-level properties. I will not try to explain here what consti-
tutes a higher-level or lower-level property; what is important here is that
1This paper is about epistemological issues regarding explanations of qualia. I try to remain neutral
about metaphysical issues. However, I do make some observations about metaphysical issues at
the end.
2What counts as reductive explanation is sometimes unclear. In this paper, I will only consider
the functional analysis method of reductive explanation, and reductive explanation will refer to
functional reductions. Other explanatory methods that might count as reductive explanations
include bridge law connections and identity statements. However, I will count only functional
reductions as reductive explanations, for three reasons. 1) Bridge law connections and identity
statements are better regarded as reductions rather than reductive explanations, because they
Andrew Lee is a senior at Brown University pursuing degrees in philosophy, Cogni-
tive Science, and a Masters in philosophy. His interests include philosophy of mind,
particularly consciousness, representation, perception, mental causation, and per-
sonal identity. He plans on pursuing a PhD in philosophy after graduation.
2 Andrew Lee
reductive explanations shows how the instantiation of one property can
result from the instantiation of other properties. A reductive explana-
tion requires two steps. First, the higher-level property to be reductively
explained must be given a functional analysis, or a definition in terms of
its causal roles.3 Such a definition has the following form: property G =
def
having lower-level property F, such that F fulfills causal role C.4 C can be
taken to be a specification of causal relations, such as “transmitting and
encoding genetic information.” Then if we can show how property F can
transmit and encode genetic information, we have shown how F fulfills
causal role C. Second, after establishing this functional definition, we can
do the scientific, empirical work of constructing an account of how some
lower-level property L fulfills C.5 It should then be clear how it is that L
realizes G. In other words, once L fulfills C, G comes for free—L fulfilling
C necessitates the instantiation of G. Once we have this account, the
reductive explanation is complete.
As an example, consider a reductive explanation of a gene. First, we
must find a functional definition for the gene. We might come up with
something like this: gene = a mechanism that transmits and encodes
def
genetic information. Then we must construct an account using lower-level
property terms that satisfies this functional role. As it turns out, DNA
molecules transmit and encode genetic information, and so can fulfill
this functional role, giving a detailed molecular biological account of the
details of the process. Once we have this, the reductive explanation of the
gene in terms of DNA molecules is complete.
establish two properties that are at different levels but are coextensive. 2) Functional analyses
allow for the multiple-realization of properties at the higher level, a chief reason that many have
preferred reductive explanation to reduction in the first place. 3) Arguably, functional reductions
have greater explanatory power than the other two methods, in that functional analyses can be
applied to more phenomena in the natural world.
3Some, such as Block and Stalnaker (1999) hold that such functional definitions are almost
never available for macroscopic phenomena. One way of seeing this is to consider a Twin Earth
scenario. Even if XYZ satisfies the functional role of water, we would not say it is water, because it
is an a posteriori truth that water is necessarily H2O. They argue that these a posteriori necessary
identity statements such as water = H2O are required for reductive explanations of water, and
that it may be a similar case for reductive explanations of pain. I will not consider this line of
reply.
4In any kind of reductive explanation, the explanans must only use terms that are at a level lower
than the terms of the explandum. Otherwise, it would not be a reductive explanation.
5Kim (2005) breaks the second step here into two separate steps; the first step involves identify-
ing the physical realizers in the reductive base that can fulfill the relevant causal role, and the
second step involves constructing the theory of how these realizers fulfill the causal role. I used
only one step here, because it seems to me that the steps of identifying the physical realizers and
constructing the theory are inevitably intertwined in the actual empirical process. Finding the
physical realizers requires consideration of what the theory would look like, and constructing the
theory involves looking for the physical realizers. In any case, nothing important hinges on this
difference.
ArticLe titLe 3
Note, however, that this sort of explanation is not a reduction of the
gene to DNA molecules. Reductions are biconditional, such that a reduc-
tion of property G to property F shows that property G ↔ property F.
In contrast, reductive explanations are conditional, such that a reductive
explanation of property G in terms of property F shows that property F
(instantiated in a certain way) → property G. Thus, the reductive expla-
nation of the gene in terms of DNA molecules is consistent with genes
being instantiated by something other than DNA molecules, as well as
reductive explanations of genes in terms of things other than DNA mol-
ecules.
Before moving on to the next section, let us make some noteworthy
observations about reductive explanations. First, reductive explanations
are not purely a priori, but are largely empirical and scientific in nature.
Successful completion of the second step requires empirical work. In
order to establish that DNA molecules realize genes, that heat is molecu-
lar motion, and so on, we rely on scientific discoveries. Second, it seems
that most natural phenomena in the universe could, in principle, be
reductively explained in basic physical terms. After we explain the gene in
terms of DNA molecules, there seems to be nothing stopping from going
further down and explaining DNA molecules in terms of even lower-
level properties. Of course, eventually we do hit a bottom level, at which
point we can have no further reductive explanation. But it should not be
surprising that we must take some things in the universe as basic. Third,
and most importantly, reductive explanations remove the mystery of why
certain phenomena occur. When we reductively explain the gene, we see
that genetic mechanisms are not just brute facts that have no explanation.
Rather, the function of DNA molecules necessitates the mechanisms of
genes. This paints an attractive ontological picture. Through reductive ex-
planation, we see that once the base-level properties are fixed, the higher-
level properties automatically are instantiated.
II. Qualia
Let us now examine reductive explanation in the case of qualia. We
may first consider what matters in an explanation of qualia. When we give
reductive explanations of genes, heat, and so on, the explanations seem
to leave nothing out. As long as we understand the relevant concepts,
we see that it is inconceivable that there is a mechanism that transmits
and encodes genetic information yet there is no gene, that molecular
motion occurs yet there is no heat6, and so on. There is nothing more to
be explained in these cases. An adequate explanation of qualia should
be likewise. If the explanation succeeds, then there should be no further
4 Andrew Lee
questions about qualia. An adequate explanation of qualia should explain
not only relevant causal factors surrounding qualia, but qualia themselves.
As Joseph Levine states, such a reductive explanation should have us say-
ing something similar to the following:
Suppose creature X satisfies functional (or physical)
description F. I understand—from my functional
(or physical) theory of consciousness—what it is
about instantiating F that is responsible for its be-
ing a conscious experience. So how could X occupy
a state with those very features and yet not be hav-
ing a conscious experience? (Levine 1993)
Now, suppose we want a reductive explanation of pain. First, we need a
functional analysis of pain. We might produce something as follows: “pain
= the property that is normally caused by tissue damage, tends to pro-
def
duce winces, groans, reports about pain, and so on.” Call the right side of
this definition D. We must then find a lower-level property that can fulfill
D. Suppose that, as it turns out, C-fiber stimulation (Cfs) fulfills D, and
we have a detailed account of how tissue damage causes Cfs, how winces,
groans, and reports about pain are causally related to Cfs, and so on. Our
reductive explanation of pain then shows us that Cfs is the realizer of pain
(at least in humans), and our reductive explanation is complete.
If this is a successful reductive explanation, then it should remove
the mystery surrounding pain. We should be able to look at how Cfs
fulfills D, and see that the instantiation of pain necessarily follows. Like
in the case of the gene, it should be inconceivable that Cfs occurs without
pain. If the reductive explanation succeeds, we should not inquire further
into pain. But I argue that such a reductive explanation of qualia fails. I
will present two thought-experiments arguing that functional analyses can-
not be applied to qualia.
First, suppose that we invite our Martian friend, Fred, over for
tea. A pleasant conversation ensues about the meaning of certain hu-
man concepts, and Fred is especially curious about two concepts: “heat”
and “pain.” Fred does not know very much about what it is like to be
a human, and so prefers having things explained in the most objective,
scientific terms possible. We start with heat. Fred is told that what we call
“heat” is the entity that causes metals to expand, melts ice cubes, and so
on. He understands, and can even point out examples of heat on Mars.
6If it seems conceivable for there to be molecular motion without heat, then this is because of a
conflation between heat and heat sensations. Molecular motion can occur without heat sensa-
tions, but not heat.
ArticLe titLe 5
But we encounter a problem when we get to pain. Even after presenting
Fred with D, our functional analysis of pain, Fred does not have the same
concept of pain that we do. Fred does understand that pain is instanti-
ated when a certain causal role is fulfilled, namely being caused by tissue
damage, tending to produce winces, groans, reports about pain, and so
on. But he seems to be missing something essential to our concept of
pain—the subjective quality of pain sensation. The subjective quality of
heat sensations is not essential to an understanding of heat, because
“heat” refers to a certain property in the world—namely, molecular mo-
tion. But the case of pain is different—pain does not refer to the cause of
our subjective sensations, but to the subjective sensations themselves. This
shows that there is an asymmetry between the case of heat and the case of
pain.7
It seems that no matter what sort of functional analysis we present
to Fred, we cannot convey this essential aspect of pain. Further, it seems
that there is no way for Fred to point out examples of pain, as he did for
heat. He could point out examples of Martians exhibiting similar behav-
ior, but perhaps the behavior is reflexive and there is no phenomenologi-
cal sensation at all. Or perhaps Martians feel something, but it is quite
different from the sensations of pain that humans feel. In any case, the
functional analysis of pain fails, because any functional analysis leaves out
the most essential part—the feeling of pain, or the subjective quality of it.
It may be objected that Fred does not fully understand our concept
of heat either. After all, just as Fred does not know what it is like for
humans to experience pain, he does not know what it is like for humans
to experience heat. But this objection conflates how the two terms refer.
We use heat sensations to determine what “heat” refers to, but heat sensa-
tions are not heat. Rather, heat produces heat sensations. We can imag-
ine a world in which molecular motion exists, yet there are no beings to
experience heat sensations. Even so, we would still say that heat exists in
that world.8 On the other hand, what we use to determine the referent of
“pain” is pain.9 Pain sensations are not produced by pain; pain sensations
are pain. Fred understands what “heat” refers to in virtue of understand-
ing the causal roles of heat, and our functional analysis of heat. But Fred
does not understand what “pain” refers to in virtue of understanding D.
7On the other hand, there is no asymmetry between the case of heat sensations and the case of
pain.
8See Kripke (1972) for a more in-depth discussion. I take Kripke’s arguments about a posteriori
necessities and essential properties for granted here.
9Cases of pain asymbolia do show that the affective and experiential aspects of pain can come
apart. However, I will assume here that a proper analysis of “pain” would show that “pain” refers
to the experiential aspect.
6 Andrew Lee
Since Fred does not understand what it is like to experience pain, he does
not fully understand our concept of pain. And since there is nothing in
the functional analysis of pain that could tell Fred what it is like to experi-
ence pain, the functional analysis fails.
The second argument against the functional analysis of qualia
concerns the inverted spectrum thought-experiment. If qualia are to be
reductively explained, then we should see from the reductive explanation
why qualia have the character that they do. A reductive explanation of
visual perception should explain why we experience the sensation of red
(rather than the sensation of green) when seeing a tomato. But noth-
ing in a functional analysis of visual perception could entail anything
about what our visual experiences are like. This point can be contested; a
functionalist might argue that in the future, we will have a more complete
scientific language and we will be able to show how functional analyses
entail subjective experience. But it is difficult to conceive what such a
functional analysis could possibly look like. Right now, it seems clear that
our best functional analyses of qualia do not entail subjective experience.
If a functionalist argues that our future functional analyses will do better,
then the burden of proof is on the functionalist to provide such an analy-
sis (or even to provide an account of what such an analysis might look
like.
Consider, then, inverted spectrum cases. We can imagine people
that are functionally indistinguishable from humans, but who have dif-
ferent color experiences. Call these people inverts. When inverts see a
tomato, they experience the color normal humans experience when they
see a cucumber. And when inverts see a cucumber, they experience the
color normal humans experience when they see a tomato. Inverts still
call tomatoes “red” and cucumbers “green,” but their inner experiences
are different. Few people think that such inverts actually exist. But the
problem here is that a functional analysis of qualia does not preclude
their existence. That is, the existence of inverts produces no contradiction
for the functional analysis. The intrinsic character of color experience is
not something that can be defined through causal connections. Even if
we have a complete characterization of a person in terms of causal connec-
tions, there seems to be no reason to regard that person as experiencing
red sensations rather than green sensations. The core of the problem is
that functional analyses do not entail anything about qualitative experi-
ences.10 But qualia are qualitative experiences, so functional analyses fail
to reductively explain qualia.
It may be objected that the inverted spectrum case begs the ques-
tion by presupposing that there is more to qualia than their causal roles.
An adequate functional analysis of qualia would preclude anything like
ArticLe titLe 7
inverts. If we have a functional definition such as experiencing red =
def
functional role R, then inverted spectrum cases cannot be possible be-
cause experiencing red just is the fulfillment of R. There is no fact of the
matter over and above this, just as there is no matter of the fact over and
above genes being the transmitters and encoders of genetic information.
However, I argue this objection fails as well, because of a conflation be-
tween metaphysical and epistemic explanation. True, functional analyses
of qualia may preclude the metaphysical possibility of inverts. But these
functional analyses still fail to be explanatory in an epistemic sense. Sup-
pose we build a robot that satisfies R. Is it then inconceivable that the ro-
bot experiences nothing? Or that it experiences a sensation different from
the sensations humans experience when they see a tomato? Surely not; it
seems that philosophical questions about the possibility of phenomenally
conscious robots amount to more than just functional definitions. Our
concept of “red” refers to an aspect of our experience, not to a functional
role. Even if it is a metaphysical fact that experiencing red just is satisfying
R, such a functional definition still fails to explain why this is so. Contrast
this with the case of the gene. Our concept of “gene” is about a functional
role—the role of transmitting and encoding genetic information. When
we are told that genes are DNA molecules fulfilling role C, this is all the
explanation we need. But when we are told that our experiences of red is
the fulfillment of R, we may still legitimately ask why this is so. Epistemi-
cally, a functional analysis of qualia leaves much to be desired.
Another way of looking at all of this is to consider reductive ex-
planation from the bottom up. Suppose we are given the relevant causal
story about DNA molecules transmitting and encoding genetic informa-
tion. Combine this with an understanding of the concept of “gene,” and
we would see that DNA molecules realize genes. But suppose we are given
the analogous causal story about Cfs fulfilling the relevant causal roles re-
garding tissue damage, winces and groans, and so on. If we combine this
with an understanding of the concept of “pain,” we would not see that
Cfs realizes pain. Our concept of “pain” refers to the subjective quality
of pain. From the causal story of Cfs, we would not be able to infer that
anything hurts. For all we know, the system that realizes this functional
story feels nothing at all. This is why we find it inconceivable that DNA
molecules fulfill functional role C yet there is no gene, but we find it
10A more vivid thought-experiment concerns zombies, who are functionally, behaviorally, and
physiologically identical to us but have no conscious experience at all. The functional analysis
of qualia is entirely consistent with everyone in the world being zombies—a functional analysis
of pain says nothing about the phenomenological sensation of pain. I chose to use the inverted
spectrum case here, because it is less extreme and also produces less complicated issues regarding
how terms refer.
8 Andrew Lee
conceivable that Cfs fulfills functional role D yet there is no pain. There is
an essential explanatory difference between the two phenomena.
We may conclude that functional analyses of qualia fail, unless the
functional reductionist can resolve these problems. But there are reasons
to think that these problems cannot, even in principle, be resolved. After
all, how could a functional analysis possibly entail subjective states? What
could such an account look like? It seems that this simply cannot be done.
As we mentioned above, there seems to be a crucial difference between
explaining genes, heat, and so on, and explaining qualia. Functional
analyses always account for a property in terms of its causal relations. But
it seems qualia have intrinsic qualities that prevent any causal defini-
tion. Further, this problem cannot be circumvented by tacking on “and
produces sensations of type X” to the functional definition. Since a
sensation of a quale is a quale, this add-on amounts to the same thing as
“and produces quale Q,” with Q replaced with whatever quale is being
functionally analyzed. But to do this would be to include the definien-
dum in the definiens. It would result in functional definitions such as
pain = that which produces pain. This would violate the requirement
def
that explanans include only terms at levels lower than the property of the
explanandum. The explanans in such a functional definition of a quale
would refer to the quale itself. This is clearly not satisfactory for a reduc-
tive explanation. As a result of all this, it seems that we can conclude that
a functional analysis of qualia is not possible. But reductive explanations
require functional analyses. Thus, qualia cannot be reductively explained.
III. The Explanatory Gap
If reductive explanation fails for qualia, then what does this entail
for the explanatory gap? First, let us consider other possibilities for expla-
nation. As noted in Section II, a successful explanation of qualia should
explain why it is that qualia are they way they are. It should let us see why
a lower-level property necessitates qualia, and it should leave us finding
it inconceivable that qualia could not exist so long as certain states or
functions are satisfied. We seek an explanation that shows that qualia are
realized by the physical, that they fall out from the physical properties just
like heat, genes, and so on. Reductive explanation seems to be just the
right model for this sort of explanation. But as we have seen, reductive
explanation, which works so well for all these other natural phenomena,
seems to fail for qualia. Can we appeal to another kind of explanation?
One response has been to use reductive identity statements, such as pain
= Cfs. If this identity is really true, then clearly pain cannot exist without
Cfs, since they are the same thing. However, any such reductions will face
Article title 9
the same problems that our functional reductions faced—even if they are
true, they fail to explain much. In the case of other a posteriori identity
statements, we are given a functional analysis that explains the identity.
But as we have seen, such an analysis seems unavailable for pain and Cfs.
Even if we have the identity pain = Cfs, this still fails to explain anything.
This is a problem for any explanation of qualia in physical terms. It seems
impossible to explain something subjective in physical terms, or to even
conceive of what an adequate explanation would look like.
If the explanatory gap cannot be closed, then we must face the options
that are left. Sometimes in other cases in which reductive explanation
failed, we have had to take something as basic. For example, it was once
thought that electricity could be reductively explained in terms of me-
chanics, but it turned out that a new law of nature had to be postulated,
in the form of Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism. However, the
problem seems to run even deeper than this. Postulating consciousness as
arising from fundamental laws of nature removes little of the mystery of
the phenomenon. Even if consciousness is basic, there is still no explana-
tion of why it seems to arise only in certain functionally complex systems.
Along with this come all the problems that face epiphenomenalism and
interactionism, depending on the type of dualism that one wishes to take.
So, one option from the failure of reductive explanation is to conclude
that consciousness is not physical, but something basic in the world. But
this still leaves much to be explained, and consciousness faces serious
conceptual challenges that other fundamental laws like electromagnetism
and gravity did not face.
However, making the metaphysical leap is not the only option. Im-
portantly, the direct consequences of the explanatory gap are epistemic,
not metaphysical. And just as there seems to be a gap between physical
properties and qualia, there is a gap between epistemic consequences and
metaphysical consequences, or between conceivability and possibility.
Even if it is conceivable that Cfs exists without pain, it does not follow
that this is a genuine metaphysical possibility. The physicalist is in a
hard-pressed position to explain why it is not a metaphysical possibility
that Cfs could exist without pain. But it is not incoherent for the physical-
ist to take such a position, even if the arguments here are accepted. The
explanatory gap is certainly a deep problem for physicalism, but it does
not entail that physicalism is false. The explanatory gap is an epistemic
problem, but physicalism is a metaphysical thesis. We cannot jump
straight from an epistemic problem to a metaphysical conclusion. Other
theoretical considerations must be taken into account.
Works Cited
Block, Ned, and Robert Stalnaker. “Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the
Explanatory Gap,” Philosophical Review 108 (1999): 1-46.
Chalmers, David. The Conscious Mind (New York: Oxford UP, 1996).
Kim, Jaegwon. Philosophy of Mind. Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 2006. Print.
———. Physicalism, or Something near Enough. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton UP,
2005. Print.
Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1980).
Levine, Joseph. “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 64 (1983): 354-361.
———. “On Leaving Out What It’s Like,” in Consciousness, ed. Martin Davies
and Glyn W. Humphreys (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993).
Stoljar, Daniel. “Physicalism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy).” Stan-
ford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 9 Sept. 2009. Web.<http://plato.stan-
ford.edu/entries/physicalism/>.