Aporia Vol. 11 number 1, 2001
Against Dialectical Ethics
A Feminist Critique of Hegel
Angelica Lemke
In his introduction to The Cambridge Companion to Hegel,
Frederick Reiser begins, "Few thinkers in the history of philosophy are
more controversial than Hegel." He proceeds to sketch a multitude of
issues that have incited division among Hegel's readers, among them
Hegel's claims in metaphysics, epistemology, aesthetics, and so on.
Though he does not name Hegel's position on women in his brief com
ments, here too Hegel has provoked heated debate. In this essay, 1 will
first explicate the role of women within Hegel's system. 1 will then turn
to two radically different discussions of Hegel by feminist scholars. Kelly
Oliver argues that Hegel's sexism is not a simple matter of his historical
moment, but instead reveals a basic problem with the structure of Hegel's
system as a whole. Shari Neller Starrett, however, claims that with a
more inclusive definition of family than may have been possible in the
nineteenth century, Hegel's system provides a potentially powerful role
for women. 1 will attempt to demonstrate that the reason for such radically
different interpretations lies in the ways in which Oliver and Starrett
view the process of dialectic.' Finally, 1 claim that though Starrett's view
is ultimately incompatible with the dialectic as Hegel intended it, it pro
vides an alternative ethics which may indeed have the empowering
potential she wants to preserve.
'"Dialectic," unless otherwise noted, will refer strictly to the Hegelian notion of
the process rather than the Socratic (or any other) notion of dialectic.
Angelica Lemke recently completed her studies at Denison University.
Angelica Lemke
I.
In her synthesis of Hegelian and Lacanian theory, Jeanne Lorraine
Schroeder briefly characterizes the sexism of Hegel's system:
Despite Hegel's claims to logic and his disdain for unsupported
presuppositions,[ when Hegel considers women] logic flies out the
window. Hegel's discussion of marriage consists largely of conclusory
statements reflective of nineteenth-century misogyny. He echoes
nineteenth-century sexual stereotypes and then claims that these
sexual differences are rational.( 285-86)
Schroeder is right to place Hegel in his historical context. His portrayal
of woman as passive, finding "her substansive destiny in the family," and
man as active, finding "substansive life in the state," is clearly not
unusual for his epoch (Philosophy §166). However, one might argue that
the Hegelian system could, without significant change, be freed of its
gender prejudices; that is to say, it may simply be a matter of exorcising
the ghosts of "nineteenth-century sexual stereotypes" from the text so
that Hegel would speak to both sexes. This section will give an overview
of Hegel's system and then explain the role Hegel assigns to women;
subsequent sections will consider to what extent this characterization
may be problematic.
Hegel's overall project is to describe "the path of the natural con
sciousness which presses forward to true knowledge" (Phenomenology
§77). The process is one of making everything conscious in an attempt to
reach the ultimate state of true Science, at which point, "Notion corre
sponds to object and object to Notion"( §80). That is to say, everything
that has existence can be properly and fully known conceptually.
Hegel's dialectic is a continual process, where that which is uncon
scious, that which is internal, always moves toward a more conscious,
more real manifestation. Hegel's most frequently quoted line," What is
rational is actual and what is actual is rational" (qtd. in Oliver 35),
informs us that to cease to progress further in the dialectic is, in some
sense, to cease to he real, for the dialectic is a process of "coming-to-be"
(Phenomenology §27).
The dialectic works within a structure of three moments:
Against Dialectical Ethics 3
In general, dialectical advance proceeds by "sublation" {Aufhebung).
Sublation signifies the process that negates and preserves at a higher level
oppositions that beset lower stages of spirit. This positive result of
dialectic constitutes what is called the third...moment. (Willett 168)
The first of these moments is an unconscious, material existence which
Hegel describes as "content." The second moment negates the first with
a rational existence, but one that is not substantially realized.^ The third
moment is the synthesis of the determinate content with the indeter
minate idea.
In both The Phenomenology of Spirit and The Philosophy of Right,
Hegel's discussion of women comes during his discussion of ethics.
Though women are confined to the lowest level of Ethical Life, it is
important to remember that they have been admitted into an actualized,
rational level of ethics in a limited sense. Ethical Life is the third stage in
the dialectic.3 However, within Ethical Life itself, three further stages are
delineated: Family, Civil Society, and the State (Philosophy §142-360),
and woman is confined to the first of these. Family is the realm of internal,
largely unconscious ethical relations based upon "natural" ties of kinship
and characterized by "feeling," which, for Hegel, is clearly not a rational
act. Though man never fully renounces his place in Family, Hegel presents
it as a kind of default existence, or even a refuge, wherein man is freed of
the pressure for rationality demanded by the higher levels of Ethical Life:
"In the family,[ man] has a tranquil intuition of this unity, and there he
lives a subjective ethical life on the plane of feeling" (Phibsophy §166).
However, this is not a sufficiently rational (i.e., real) existence:" So far as
[man] is not a citizen but belongs to the Family, [he] is only an unreal
impotent shadow" (Phenomenology §451). Confined as she is to the
Family, then, woman is always "an unreal impotent shadow."
^The influence of Aristotle on Hegel is fairly obvious; it may be helpful to think
of the first moment as analogous to prime matter, the second moment to a form,
and the third to the combination of these two in a particular individual.
'The first is Abstract Right, which might be characterized as the individual's
basic right to "be a person and respect others as persons" (Phibsophy §36). The
second is Morality, which is an explicitly Kantian, mle-based ethics.
4 Angelica Lemke
The Family, however,s erves an additional purpose beyond providing
a "tranquil...plane of feeling"; rather, "the deed...which embtaces the
entire existence of the blood-relation" is the burial of its dead members
{Phenomenology §451). It is crucial for Hegel that the dead individual
not be left "at the mercy of every lower irrational individuality and the
forces of abstract material elements, all of which are now more powerful
than himself (§452). In death, the individual loses his'' particularity and
attains universality in that he is now pure being, the matter of the decom
posing body (§451). Butial, tben, interrupts the work of irrational,
unconscious nature and allows the "universal being" of the dead to
become "a being that has returned into itself, a being-for-self....The
powerless, simply isolated individual has been raised to universal individu
ality"( §452). Burial, performed by the family, recognizes and preserves the
individual as such. This process, however, does not ptotect the individual
insofar as he is a member of the familial realm, but projects him beyond
that realm:
The Family thereby makes him a member of a community which
prevails over and holds under control the forces of particular mate
rial elements and the lower forms of life, which sought to unloose
themselves against him and to destroy him.( Phenomenology §452,
emphasis added)
Indeed, the process of burial has endowed the individual with powers far
outreaching the "unreal impotent shadows" of the Family:
[The buried individual's] power is the abstract, pure universal, the
elemental individual which equally draws hack into the pure abstrac
tion which is its essence the individuality that breaks loose from
the element, and constitutes the self-conscious reality of the nation.
(Phenomenology §453, final emphasis added)
tl maintain Hegel's use of the male generic in this discussion in part because we
have not yet determined if Hegel's system can he maintained with alterations to
allow for gender inclusiveness, as well as for other reasons which will become
clear in discussing Oliver's critique of Hegel.
Against Dialectical Ethics 5
Confined to the Family, woman is unable to access this power, though, as
Family, she performs an essential function.
Hegel sets up a model of woman's proper ethical behavior for us in
Sophocles' Antigone, pointing to her as "one of the most sublime pre
sentations of [woman's] virtue," and her story, indeed, revolves around
the issue of burial rites (Philosophy §166). By defying the civil law put
forth by Creon and burying her brother, Antigone restores Polynices to
the realm of community: "He passes over from the divine law, within
whose sphere he lived, over to human law. But the sister becomes
...the head of the household and the guardian of the divine law"
(Phenomenology §459). Yet this commitment to the divine is a commit
ment to an "element that is exempt from an existence in the real world"
(§457). Antigone has made her brother "real," but she herself cannot
gain that status. Her actions are of "the highest intuitive awareness of
what is ethical. She does not attain to consciousness of it" (§457).
Hegel has set up an opposition between a familial, intuitive,f eminine
realm that answers to divine law and a societal, rational, masculine realm
that answers to civil law. He claims that "neither of the two is by itself
absolutely valid....The conscious [proceeds] from the unconscious"
(Phenomenology §460). This point seems fairly clear; however, his state
ment of the flip side of this dependence, that "the power of[ divine law] has
its actual existence on earth; through consciousness, it becomes existence
and activity," seems less supported (§460). In the next section, I turn to
Kelly Oliver's critique of Hegel, arguing that this second claim is anti
thetical to Hegel's overall project.
II.
Oliver has summarized Hegel's overall project as follows:
To put it simply, the goal of philosophy is to articulate fully the
meaning of consciousness such that there is no difference
between that meaning and its articulation. If this goal is reached,
nothing remains unconscious or unspoken. To say that the
rational is real and that the real is the rational is to say that only
what can be conceptualized is real and that everything real can be
conceptualized.( 35)
6 Angelica Lemke
Her critique of Hegel centers as much around the overall goals of the
project as it does around his description of women's tole within it. The
dialectical structure of sublating all earlier states and bringing them into
consciousness cannot be achieved in the case of the Family. It is not in
its nature, as an unconscious realm, to be made conscious, though this
is the heart of Hegel's project.' Oliver claims that the relationship
between the two ethical realms of Family and Society is such that
"woman fades as culture emerges" (34). That is to say, the Family serves
a transitional function for Hegel's system, moving its members, through
its burial rituals, from the unconscious to the conscious ethical order. As
the family member confined to that realm, "woman gets left behind,"
failing to reemerge in later stages of the dialectic (35-36). The opposi
tion between the realms of conscious human and unconscious divine law
powers the move to higher levels of consciousness.
Hegel portrays the burial rites as the transition from the unconscious
to the rational, conscious community, and the family is responsible for
facilitating this transition. Without the assignment of women to the
familial realm, there is no guarantee that the burial rites will get carried
out; if all family members are free to move to higher levels of conscious
ness, the possibility is raised that no one will remain to maintain the
familial realm. Man's move forward will ultimately be undermined by
the power of "the lower forms of life, which [seek] to unloose themselves
against him and to destroy him" without the family to hold those forces
in check (Phenomenology §452). Oliver maintains that burial rites are
essentially a protection against women (and the family) themselves,
equated, as they are, with the unconscious:
Nature [which threatens the body without the proper burial rituals]
is associated with unconscious, abstract elements that manifest
'Similarly, Cynthia Willet has argued that Hegel's dialectical structure is modeled
after an Aristotelian notion of tragedy as cathartic. Rather than reemerging in
the third moment of the dialectic, the negated first moment is purged from later
levels. Her discussion echoes Oliver's claim that the unconscious is inherently
unable to proceed in the dialectic; "It is a pathos of dialectical advance that
every reconciliation of opposed principles demands the systematic expulsion of
what cannot be taken up into...thought" (170).
Against Dialectical Ethics 7
themselves as unconscious ethical relations in the family. The
family is associated with this unconscious, abstract, sensuous
nature...but as it turns out, it is primarily woman, as wife, mother,
and sister, who is identified with these unconscious and irrational
aspects of the family....Yet, the threat from which she protects man
[by burying him] turns out to be the threat of nature and all of its
associations....I n this sense, the threat against which woman pro
tects man is the threat of the feminine.( 37)
Woman, then, offers herself as a sacrifice. She reacts to the intuitive
ethics of her realm,f ollows the feeling of duty in burying her brother, but
is never conscious of her duty as ethical: "Woman cannot reach this
higher level of conceptualization because of her nature. Paradoxically, it
is because she is bound by her nature that man can escape nature and
enter culture"( Oliver 46). A crucial point of Antigone is that Antigone's
critique of civil law results in her death. Antigone has no relationship
with civil law: "Antigone's loyalties to a traitor have bothered other
commentators,[ but] Hegel is content that Antigone's duties have nothing
to do with politics" (44-45). Woman's relationship to the civil realm is
that of a surpassed (yet supportive) level of the dialectic. In this sense,
it seems that Hegel's dialectic has stalled; the project of explaining "the
path of the natural consciousness...through a completed experience of
itself" has not accounted for the feminine element that has been left
behind (Phenomenology §77). The dialectic has not truly given us a "com
pleted experience."
It is a necessary condition of Hegel's structure that a sacrifice be
made in order for the transition to civil society and subsequent levels of
the dialectic to be possible. Yet this sacrifice, this leaving behind, calls
Hegel's entire project into question:
If there is some part of the experience of consciousness that cannot
be conceptualized, then Hegel's project is called into question. Then
the real is not rational. If the feminine is not conceptualized and
brought into the levels of the dialectical progression of con
sciousness, then there is an element that is left behind by the
Phenomenology. Hegel's analysis of the feminine in "The Ethical
Order" undermines the entire project of the Phenomenology of Spirit.
(Oliver 52, emphasis added)
8 Angelica Lemke
For Oliver, the Phenomenology is at best half of a full account of con
sciousness. Because Hegel has portrayed the feminine and masculine as
"two naturally distinct self-consciousnesses," he must give two distinct
accounts (53). Yet the account he gives of the feminine is such that it
cannot even attain the title of "consciousness." This is a fundamental
problem with the structure of the dialectic as a whole. It is not only
Hegel's gendered account of the ethical realm that creates a problem; a
sacrifice must necessarily be made at the level of Family, whether we
maintain the division along gender lines or turn to other criteria for
choosing who will stay behind. In the process of making everything con
scious, something must necessarily remain unconscious.
111.
In contrast to Oliver's rejection of Hegel, Starrett argues that the
structure of the Hegelian Family in opposition to the civil realm offers
what she terms "Hegelian Critical Relations," which work progressively
without privileging one realm in favor of the other. She finds much to be
gleaned from Hegel's conception of Family, claiming that "Hegel has a
radical and potentially empowering notion of women in the realm of
family"( 253).
Starrett claims that Antigone's adherence to divine law provides a
powerful counterpoint to Creon's civil law, that woman "acts as an effec
tive, viable, and even threatening critical opponent to those who are
currently empowered through public laws of their own devising" (256).
The opposition between the two realms, divine law and human law,
family and community, acts as a kind of checks-and-balances system,
powering the development of both realms. Starrett posits, "It is obvious
that the nation in Sittlichkeit^ is male-defined, and that women as
guardians of the family stand in critical opposition to it" (266). When a
problem erupts in civil law such that it fails to account for divine, familial
concerns, this critical relationship takes effect; "Antigone's very presence
in the public sphere problematizes the distinction between 'public' and
^Sittlichkeit is the "Ethical Order" section of The Phenomenology of Spirit and the
"Ethical Life" in The Phibsophy of Right.
Against Dialectical Ethics 9
'private'" ( 262). She represents the need to restore balance between
these relations. Opposition powers the dialectical movement forward,
and, Starrett claims, the fact that both realms work together to create
this tension implies "that neither of the two movements will fail to be
represented" (259).
Starrett acknowledges that there is danger in this opposition:
While the divine-human confrontation [is] at work, a strong spiritual
element infused their interaction through the family and through
women. But when the confrontation ceases to be critically counter
balanced and the positions are trivialized, the spiritual element is lost
along with the...tranquility that once surrounded the relationships
between men and women.( 261)
The balance of this relationship is tenuous. The danger of one realm
oppressing the other is always real but is offset, for Starrett, by the cri
tiquing power each realm has over the other; Creon may, as representative
of civil law, overstep his place and infringe upon what is properly under
divine law, but Antigone has the power to oppose this move, and vice
versa. For Starrett, the civil realm sustains the familial, and the familial
realm sustains the civil. As we have seen, Oliver agrees with Starrett on
the second point; her analysis reveals that the reciprocal, mutual relation
ship that Starrett characterizes is not compatible with Hegel's project.
The "tranquility" which Starrett envisions is not possible under the
dialectic; the feminine, familial realm supports the masculine, civil realm
at its own expense.
IV.
The mediation between the positions presented is best found by
considering their radically different portrayals of the dialectic. Oliver's
portrayal of the dialectic seems to align more closely with the overall
project Hegel has undertaken. Explaining everything, rationalizing
everything is a continual, progressive process rather than an ongoing
tension. Such balanced tensions, for Hegel, must come to imbalance in
order for the dialectic to play itself out fully, as can be seen in his master-
slave dialectic.
10 Angelica Lemke
It would seem that a system such as Starrett presents may provide the
kind of empowered position for which she argues, particularly given
the stipulation that the two ethical realms need not be aligned with
gender difference, but that it would fail to be a Hegelian position. For
Starrett, the tension between family and community, divine and human,
unconscious and conscious pulls the realms into a state of equilibrium.
Starrett warns against imbalance in this relationship. If that tension is
upset, if one aspect moves at the expense of the other, then "the spiritual
element is lost" (261) and the positive effects of the family fall behind,
yet the familial realm can reassert its importance, can, like Antigone,
"problematize the distinction between public and private" (262) in
order to maintain its function of a critical counterbalance. This seeking
of balance, this process of each realm critiquing the other, is not the
combination of the two realms into the third moment of Hegel's dialectic.
For Starrett, the relationship functions best if the first two moments do
not effectively "cancel each other out," in order to progress beyond both,
but maintain an ongoing interaction. This process, 1 maintain, is not
dialectical, but might better be characterized as a dialogue. Like an early
Platonic dialogue, the critical questions with which the two realms grapple
remain always unresolved; that is what ensures the continual recognition
of one realm by the other. The conversation remains unfinished. If there
is to be a move forward, and, indeed, the conversation will continually
refine the relationship between the two realms, the movement will
involve both parties.
Further, the issue of burial rites, of the necessary confinement of
one gender (or of any particular group) to the familial realm in order
to ensure the maintenance of a higher realm, can be resolved here.
Unlike Hegel, Starrett does not portray the two realms in hierarchical
structure; the preservation of one realm does not supercede the interests
of the other. The Family is free to assert its own ethical importance
against that of the Civil realm. The individual need not be confined to
one realm or the other so long as both realms are involved in a proper
dialogue.
1 would also contend that Starrett's dialogue is such that it can take
place within the individual; men and women alike can take on the role
of family to bury their relations, thereby maintaining the dead's con
nection to the community without relinquishing their own right to act
Against Dialectical Ethics 11
as a member of that community.' The kind of balance that Starrett seeks
may be found within the individual's own balance of her/his responsibil
ities to each realm, leaving the community able to develop further as a
whole. In this way, Hegel's massive and powerful system of the social
world is in some ways maintained.
The objections and solutions raised by Starrett and Oliver point us
beyond a simplistic revision of Hegel's system to a more thoughtful con
sideration of the limitations it contains. The dialectic fails on its own
terms, yet it at least provides us with a starting place from which we can
begin to formulate a dialogical ethics that, rather than continually pro
gressing in the hierarchical way of the dialectic, lives up to Hegel's claim
that neither family nor society, consciousness nor unconsciousness, male
nor female, divine nor civil, intuition nor rationality "is by itself
absolutely valid" (Phenomenology §460).»
'Though it is beyond the scope of this essay to discuss in detail, an additional
rendering of Hegel's system can he formulated regarding the fact that the family, in
burying the individual, is serving the community's interests and is, therefore, part of
that community, again blurring the distinction Hegel would presumably maintain.
81 would like to thank Steve Vogel for his patient advising of this paper, as well as
the Denison Philosophy Class of 2000 for their intelligent and careful discussion
of Hegelian ethics.
12 Angelica Lemke
Works Cited
Reiser, Frederick C. "Introduction: Hegel and the Problem of
Metaphysics." The Cambridge Companion to Hegel. Ed. Frederick C.
Reiser. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 1-24.
Hegel, G.W.F. The Phenomenology of Spirit. Trans. A.V . Miller. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1977.
. The Philosophy of Right. Trans. T. M. Knox. London: Oxford
University Press, 1952.
Oliver, Kelly. Family Values: Subjects between Nature and Culture. New
York: Routledge, 1997.
Schroeder, Jeanne Lorraine. The Vestal and the Fasces: Hegel, Lacan,
Property and the Feminine. Rerkeley: University of California Press,
1998.
Starrett, Shari Neller. "Critical Relations in Hegel: Woman,F amily, and
the Divine." Feminist Interpretations of G.W.F. Hegel. Ed. Patricia
Jagentowicz Mills. University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press, 1996. 253-73.
Willet, Cynthia. "Hegel, Antigone and the Possibility of a Woman's
Dialectic." Modem Engendering: Critical Feminist Readings in Modem
Western Philosophy. Ed. Rat-Ami Rar On. Albany: SUNY Press,
1994. 167-81.