Aporia Vol. 11 number 1, 2001
God's Sovereignty: A Unifying Theme in
Augustine's Thought
Eric Austin Madsen
Augustine conspicuously reversed his views on the nature and power
of human will during his lifetime. Some critics have suggested that a
lack of intellectual resolve is to blame for this apparent flip-flop, which
was most evident in Augustine's polemics. Many scholars point to his
numerous theological encounters against "the pagans, the Donatists, the
Manichees, [and] the Pelagians" in which free will was consistently a
point of discussion, and thus they portray him as "Augustine the end
lessly polemical" (O'Donnell 29). During Augustine's own lifetime,
Julian of Eclanum accused him of being a Manichee in his debate against
the Pelagians (Scheppard 97). Others, including Pelagius, suggested
that he was a Pelagian in his debate against the Manichees (Bonnet,
"Pelagianism" 34). One may receive the incorrect impression that
Augustine was simply "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine"( Ephesians 4:14). Perhaps worse, one may believe that
Augustine conveniently altered his positions only to distance himself
from those who were accused of heresy.
Both of these impressions are mistaken. Accusers contemporary
with Augustine, as well as today's critics, fail to acknowledge that even
in discussions of free will, the will was not the issue most central to
Augustine's thought. Rather,f ree will constituted only a subsidiary, though
significant, discussion to support his most firmly held conviction: a belief
in God's absolute sovereignty and goodness. Augustine acknowledged that
his free will defense evolved over time; however, after his conversion to
Eric Austin Mcuhen is a senior majoring in economics with a minor in philosophy at
Brigham Young University. This essay tied for third place in the 2001 David H. Yam
Philosophical Essay Competition.
44 Eric Austin Madsen
Catholic Christianity, he never changed his position on God's sovereignty.
Indeed, Augustine's maturing beliefs about God lend coherency to his
reversal on free will. Hence, 1 will demonstrate:( 1) Augustine believed
that sovereignty is the most essential divine attrihute, and (2) this
developing conviction provides a root of consistency to his changed
position on the will.
I. Augustine's Perceptions of Human Will
Select passages from Augustine's writings capture his early and late
views on human will. The first statements are from On Free Choice of the
Will, which Augustine wrote primarily in opposition to the Manichees
and completed shortly after his conversion to Catholic Christianity. In
this work, he argues that humans are responsible for their moral choices,
choices between good and evil made according to one's own free and
efficacious volition. "Hence, it follows," he writes in On Free Choice of
the Will, "that whoever wishes to live rightly and honorably, if he prefers
that before all fugitive and transient goods, attains his object with perfect
ease. In order to attain it he has to do nothing but to will it" (qtd. in
Babcock 36). Augustine and his interlocutor also conclude, "Nothing
can make the mind a companion of desire except its own will and free
choice"( 1.11). Nothing is so completely "within the power of the will as
the will itself" (qtd. in Babcock 36). Furthermore, Augustine contends
that there is no cause of the will beside the will, and this includes God's
foreknowledge (cf. Free 111). Hence, the newly converted Catholic
claims that the will is absolutely free, uncaused, and able to choose either
good or evil.
After a lifetime of polemics and Catholic apologetics, Augustine's
views on the will changed radically. Through years of debating moral
elitists, such as the Donatists and the Pelagians, he relinquished or refined
earlier views, obviously reversing his general application of free will.
One year before his death in 429, Augustine wrote De Fraedentinatione
Sanctorum, in which he stated:
Let us therefore understand the calling by which the elect are made.
They are not chosen because they have believed, but in order that
they may believe.... And so they were chosen before the foundation of
the world, by that predestination by which God fulfilled what He had
God's Sovereignty 45
preordained. For those whom he had predestined, he also called, by that
calling according to His plan, and not therefore any others, but those
whom he called, he justified( Rom. 8:30). Nor did He call any others but
those whom He had predestined, called and justified, those also he
glorified, by that end which has no end. God therefore chose the
faithful; but in order that they might be faithful, not because they
were already faithful. (Qtd. in Bonner," Pelagianism" 30)
In this passage, it appears that Augustine denied any element of
human free will. No one can be saved unless God chose them "before the
foundation of the world." There is not even human initiative in righteous
action. Those whom God blesses with his grace, he blesses "in order
that they might be faithful," but not because they did anything to merit
His grace.
Given these radically contrasting and seemingly irreconcilable
views, we can see why many scholars have convincingly accused
Augustine of waffling in his theology. They have ample statements from
various points of Augustine's life which support their thesis. However, it
would be unfair to judge the integrity of Augustine's thought by addressing
this single issue in isolation from other considerations. The worthwhile
question to pursue when studying Augustine's positions on the will is not
simply whether his understanding of the will changed. This seems obvious.
Rather, thorough assessment of Augustine's thought requires that we
ask why it changed. 1 suggest a holistic approach. We should consider
Augustine's understanding of the will only within the greater context
of his theology and the encounters that instigated his responses. An
analysis without this context is prone to misrepresent his thought.
First, 1 will consider what appears to be the paramount concern in
Augustine's theology: his perception of God. Second, 1 will identify
the central issue in two of Augustine's major debates and analyze why
he changed his position on the will.
11. Augustine's Perception of Deity
We need not look far to see that Augustine constantly sought to
understand his God. The eloquence with which he expressed his perception
of the divine may never be surpassed by another writer. Still, his writings
often manifested the struggle he experienced in trying to grasp some
46 Eric Austin Madsen
consistent portrayal of the Creator. TTiroughout his Confessions, he
attempted a description. Early in the first book, he wrote:
What, then, is the God I worship?...You, my God, are supreme,
utmost in goodness, mightiest and all-powerful, most merciful and
most just. You are the most hidden from us and yet the most present
amongst us, the most beautiful and yet the most strong, ever enduring
and yet we cannot comprehend you. You are unchangeable and yet
you change all things. You are never new, never old, and yet all
things have new life from you. (I. 4)
After this somewhat paradoxical sketch of divinity, Augustine affirmed
that "even those who are most gifted with speech cannot find words to
describe you"( Confessions 1.4). Indeed, as one who was manifestly "gifted
in speech," even Augustine probably felt inadequate in his theological
poetry. The truth is that he spent his entire life seeking out accurate
propositions to understand God's nature. This search directed his life
experiences. He weighed, rejected, and incorporated numerous ideas by
discussing the nature of God with his closest friends and debating the
matter with his most acute rivals.
Unable to reconcile the fact of evil and other issues with his
Catholic understanding of God, young Augustine was proselyted to
the Manichaean sect in which he was a "hearer"( cf. Brown 46-53). The
Manichees proffered a metaphysical dualism that differed radically from
the Catholic monism to which Augustine was exposed in adolescence.
Catholics believed that God is perfectly good and all powerful, the sole
creator of the universe ex nihilo, and the only noncontingent being.
Manichees, in contrast, denied God's absolute power and His creation of
all things ex nihilo. They contended that God is not the only eternal
being. This theological position allowed them to persuasively account for
the existence of evil by theorizing that creation did not result from God
alone, but from two opposing deities. Manichaean creation involved
influence from the supreme good, which rules over the kingdom of
light, and the supreme evil, which rules over the kingdom of darkness.
The good and evil entities struggle perpetually to defeat one another.
Manichees further believed that this battle between good and evil plays
out in humans as an inward conflict of the soul. They exonerated humans
from moral responsibility because the evil in a human compels sin.
God's Sovereignty 47
Although Manicheism contrasted with Augustine's post-Manichaean
thought, the young truth-seeker was attracted by its convincing solutions
to philosophical problems.
The metaphysics that so attracted Augustine to the Manichees
eventually turned him away from them. During his nine years with the
cult, his understanding of God must have altered immensely. In his
Confessions, Augustine identifies the Manichees' degrading view of God
as the primary reason for his departure from their cult. "I was quite sure
that the theories of the Manichees were wrong"; he explains, "1 could
see that while they were inquiring into the origin of evil they were full of
evil themselves, since they preferred to think that yours was a substance
that could suffer evil rather than that theirs was capable of committing it"
(VII. 3). Augustine courageously questioned and denounced Manichaean
conceptions. He would not accept a doctrine that portrayed God as less
than all-powerful, a God who struggles against evil in the same way
humans struggle against evil. Augustine ascended to a belief that God is
"incorruptible." He feared that if he were to continue entertaining the
Manichaean doctrine of God, "1 should myself become a cause of evil"
(VII. 3). For God's power is such that "no soul has ever been, or ever will
be, able to conceive of anything better than you, who are the supreme,
the perfect Good"( Vll. 4). Augustine thus abandoned Manicheism and
its convenient solution to the problem of evil even before he was able to
"find [for himself] a clear explanation, without complications, of the cause
of evil" (VII. 3). His belief in God's matchless nature transcended his
desire to be content with his own worldview.
Augustine's understanding of God continued to develop after his
departure from the Manichees, but it never again changed so radically
and quickly. Out of the many propositions about God that Augustine may
have entertained, James O'Donnell identifies the ones which persisted
"page after page in his work" as "those...of goodness, justice, and spiri
tuality" (28). For example, in his book On Christian Doctrine, Augustine
suggested a criterion for God's nature: we cannot believe "that any being
to whom there exists a superior is God. And so all concur in believing
that God is that which excels in dignity all other objects" (I. 7). Guided
by this criterion, Augustine continued his search for the nature of God.
Sovereignty, which entails God's absolute control and unques
tionable rule over the universe, became paramount in Augustine's
mature thought. Nothing happens in God's creation that He does not
48 Eric Austin Madsen
will, or at least permit, to happen. God's choices are just and final
because they are from God. This attribute, sovereignty, trumped any
other quality that seemed descriptive of God but somehow countered
his absolute rule. Gerald Bonnet observes, "[Augustine] became progres
sively more and more persuaded that the sovereignty of God had to be
maintained against all human notions of love and justice"( "Pelagianism"
29). A scripture which Augustine often quoted affirms Bonnet's claim:
"Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it. Why hast thou made me thus? Hath
not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" (Romans 9:21; cf. Bonner,
"Pelagianism" 35). God alone determines the order of His universe.
According to His sovereign and unchecked rule, it is His prerogative to
do as He pleases.
Augustine maintained that human standards are entirely insufficient
to judge whether or not God acts rightly, for the world is His own
creation, and He manifests His sovereign power over it by doing as He
wills. For example, united with many authorities of the Catholic Church
in Africa, Augustine affirmed the doctrine of original sin (Scheppard
106). This teaching purported that infants who died before baptism
received some degree of punishment in purgatory. In debates against a
Pelagian (Julian of Eclanum), he defended this doctrine extensively,
even though it led some to question the magnitude of God's love
(cf. Scheppard 97-106). Indeed, Julian accused Augustine of worshiping
a "God who was a nascentium persecutor," a persecutor of infants (Bonner,
"Pelagianism" 29). But, Augustine may have recriminated, Julian was
out of place in passing judgment on how God chooses to manifest his
all-powerful decree. God retains the unquestionable right not to allow
any impure being to live in His presence. Furthermore, He manifests His
sovereign rule by exercising this privilege. Augustine also maintained, of
the souls whom God "willed...to be bom," more would be damned than
would be saved, and those who are "most justly damned" are of" no concern
with the righteous God"( qtd. in Bonner 29). As early as when he wrote
On Free Choice of the Will, the priority of God's sovereign decree was
developing in Augustine's mind. In that work he affirmed," The suffering
of sinners is part of the perfection of the created order" (111. 9). Sinners
enable God to express His justice by punishing them (You 8). Indeed,
God's Sovereignty 49
"when sinners are unhappy, the universe is perfect"; their "torments...
adom the world" (III. 9).
Human notions of love and fairness clearly took second place to
Augustine's emphasis on God's unquestionable rule. His firm resolve
to exalt God's sovereign dominion as His most important attribute
became the mold which formed the rest of his theology. The influence
of Augustine's conception of God is especially clear in his positions on
human will.
III. Two Polemical Encounters: The Manichees and the Pelagians
Two of Augustine's major theological debates were, prima facie,
fundamentally concerned with the issue of free will. In his debate against
the Manichees, he argued that the will is free and powerful. Later, in
contrast, he dogmatically denounced the personal initiative of human
will in his conflict with the Pelagians. One may prematurely question
Augustine's intellectual resolve. However, under a more careful analysis
of these debates, we learn that the issue off ree will was only subsidiary to,
although intimately connected with, the paramount matter: Augustine's
theological propositions on the nature of God. In these two polemical
encounters, Augustine sought to illuminate human conceptions of God's
sovereignty either by affirming or denying various inferences that may be
made from believing in this divine quality. For instance, against the
Manichees he was logically compelled to defend God's goodness in view
of the existence of evil, since he maintained that God is all powerful.
Against the Pelagians Augustine argued that man may not receive merit
for whatever good act he performs. God is the only being genuinely
credited for any good thing, and it is only by deception that man may
believe otherwise. A brief consideration of these debates will reveal that the
central issues in both of them were God's sovereignty and the implications
of that sovereignty.
Augustine's book On Free Choice of the Will was a by-product of his
conflict with the Manichees. This is the source to which scholars usually
turn to assess Augustine's affirmation of the free will. Even though the
subject of will is a critical point of discussion, the title of his book may be
misleading. His goal in writing the text was not to communicate his
views on the will. Rather, he affirmed the free will because it was central
50 Eric Austin Madsen
to his strategy for achieving his primary purpose: to refute the Manichees.
In a set of later writings called Retractions, he explained the fundamental
problem he perceived in Manicheism; "These men—they are the
Manichees—in their wickedness and error, wish to assert the existence of
a certain principle of evil, immutable and co-etemal with God" (2). In
this statement, he also revealed why he wanted to refute them: their
doctrine was degrading to Augustine's understanding of God. The work
might have been more revealing of its purpose had it been titled "In
Defense of God's Sovereignty." Or he might have called it, "Against the
Manichees," similar to the title of a later polemical work.
The motivating purpose of On Free Choice of the Will is evident
throughout the work. Augustine commenced the book's discussion by
posing the central issue as a provocative question: "Is God the cause of
evil?" (1.1). Additional section headings continued this theme:" Why
did God give freedom of the will to men, since it is by this that men
sin?" (11.1) and "All good things come from God"( 11. 17). These issues,
especially the first, address the same points that the Manichees utilized to
make proselytes. Indeed, it was young Augustine's confusion over the fact
of evil that initially attracted him to Manicheism. Augustine made it
clear that the intent of his work was to provide alternative answers to the
difficult questions and theological solutions over which the Manichees
believed they had a monopoly. His purpose was not to simply articulate his
views on free will. Rather, his views on free will entailed a line of defense
against Manichaean doctrines which threatened Catholic perceptions of
God's supremacy.
Thus, Augustine approached his encounter against the Manichees
with two fundamental purposes. First, he wanted to demonstrate that his
belief in the Catholic doctrine of God was rational even in light of the
fact of evil. Second, he sought to demonstrate the superiority of his beliefs
to Manicheism. Augustine achieved both of these purposes by strongly
affirming that the human being, rather than an eternal evil entity, is
entirely responsible for his own evil acts performed through his own free
volition. He argued that the initiative to pursue or avoid evil is entirely
within the power of the will, for which there is no prior cause other than
the will itself. As a result, the sinner can blame none but himselff or how
he directs his own free choices.
This affirmation of moral responsibility was sufficient to contradict
the Manichaean explanation for why humans do evil. If a human freely
God's Sovereignty 51
chooses to sin and is thereby responsible for his sins, then the human may
be held accountable and stand in need of repentance. Yet Manichees
believed that the self is not responsible for evil acts, but that an evil
entity locked inside the self overpowers the will and compels the human
to sin. Seemingly inconsistently, they also believed that humans stand in
need of repentance. Augustine observed that where there is no moral
volition, and consequently no moral responsibility, there is no sin.
Hence, on the Manichaean view, it is absurd to insist that humans sin
and need to repent.
Augustine also pointed to man's agency as the reason evil entered
into the world. This position reconciled the fact of evil with God's goodness
and sovereignty. He added an additional premise in order to demonstrate
God's wisdom in allowing man the freedom through which he sins and
without which he would not sin. Augustine declared that free will is a
good, for man "cannot act rightly unless he wills to do so"( Free II. 1). If
acting rightly is good, it follows that "he must have free will, without
which he cannot act rightly" (II. 1). Augustine acknowledged that free
will is only an intermediate good since a person could use it for evil, but,
nonetheless, it is still a good. Furthermore, God did not give "us free will
so that we might sin" (11. 1). Rather, God gave us free will so that we
could live rightly. Man voluntarily uses his free will to sin. With this basic
defense, Augustine argued that God can be both good and sovereign,
even though He rules over a world that contains evil.
Although Augustine's strategy against the Manichees called for a
human-centered discussion, he nonetheless revealed his priority by placing
the power of human will within a perspective that glorifies only God.
Man may choose to enter into God's grace, but God enables every good
thing. No human being can genuinely be praised for the good that he does.
Augustine warned, "Only hold to your firm faith, since no good thing
comes to your perception, understanding, or thought which is not from
God"( Free 11. 20). This theme continued in other writings. In On Christian
Doctrine, Augustine observed," No one ought to consider anything as his
own, except perhaps what is false" (Preface). The only "achievements"
for which man can take full credit are those which are wrong.
Augustine consistently sought to praise only God, even if doing so
entailed discounting man's significance.
This line of theodicy has received its fair share of criticisms and
defenses (cf. Greet; Bums; Babcock). Whether or not Augustine's argument
52 Eric Austin Madsen
is sound is beside our present concern. Most important, Augustine's
purpose in addressing free will was not realized in the free will analysis
alone. His entire purpose for even calling the will into question was to
lend rationality and defense to his perception of God. Nonetheless, we
must plainly acknowledge that he certainly did address the free will.
Except for a few minor passages, the hook consistently suggests that
the views he expressed on free will apply to the entire human family.
This point, if proven, seems sufficient for demonstrating that Augustine
later altered his understanding of the will. However, the fact that he later
restricted his views on free will did not weaken his defense. The defense
remained just as strong even though Augustine reserved free will only
for the first humans (Adam and Eve) and angels (Bahcock 44).
Affirming the free will of these beings was sufficient for explaining the
entrance of evil into the world and thus for exonerating God from culpa-
hility (cf. Bahcock). For Augustine maintained that, evil having entered
the world, God manifests His justice by punishing evil. This punishment
includes burdening mortals with difficulty in obedience and ignorance of
what is right. In his dispute with the Manichees, this restriction was
unnecessary for his purposes and would have only complicated matters.
But in his later encounter against the Pelagians, he resorted to exactly
this position.
Pelagianism developed within a splinter group of the Catholic faith
under the teachings of Pelagius, a bishop from Britain (cf. Bonnet,
Augustine 312; Brown 340). Similar to Augustine's early position, the
Pelagians believed in the absolute free choice of the will. They affirmed
that humans are entirely responsible and accountable for their own
moral choices. In fact, the Pelgaian "heresy," as it was labeled, so closely
resembled Augustine's On Free Choice of the Will that Pelagius quoted
from it in his work De Natura. However, the Pelagians exceeded the
limits that Augustine could accept. They were moral elitists. Pelagians
believed tbat man could be absolutely perfect and live in complete
obedience to every one of God's commandments. Furtbermore, they
taught, "Since perfection is possible for man, it is obligatory" (qtd. in
Brown 342). Sin should be understood as "a deliberate act of contempt
for God" (Brown 350). Their battle cry was taken from the New
Testament: "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in Heaven is perfect"
(Matthew 5:48). They wanted the "Christian church" to be "an institution
made up of perfect men"( Brown 348).
God's Sovereignty 53
Augustine held Pelagianism in contempt not only because he saw it
as a threat to fundamental principles of Catholic Christianity, but also as a
threat to himself. While Pelagians tried to show that Augustine supported
their views, the Catholic church in Africa accused them of heresy. The
issue that bothered Augustine most was that their teachings rendered God's
redeeming grace unnecessary to salvation (Retractions 1). Furthermore, their
over emphasis on human initiative led to self-praise rather than praise of
God. Just as Manicheism confused a correct imderstanding of God, so did
Pelagianism, although the two theologies did so in very different ways. At
the same time, the conflicts forced Augustine into an extremely awkward
position. The defense he used against the Manichees to exalt God was
utilized by the Pelagians in a manner that threatened his perceptions of
God's sovereign rule.
When Augustine recognized the dangers of Pelagianism, "which
threatened to destroy any belief in the grace of God" (Bonner,
"Pelagianism" 35), he reversed his earlier view that man has initiative
over whether or not he may choose to enter into God's grace. Augustine
was determined to give all credit for good things to God, this time by
emphasizing God's sovereignty in determining who receives salvation.
This meant that man could not be considered meritorious for the achieve
ment of any good thing, including the initial choice to act rightly.
Consequently, Augustine altered his understanding of human will
as it applied to mortals in general. The initial choice for righteousness
is not in man's power: "Unless the will is freed by the grace of God from
the bondage through which it has become a slave of sin, and unless it
obtains aid in conquering its vices, mortal men cannot live rightly and
piously" (Retractions 4). Furthermore in his Expositio in Epistulam ad
Romanos he says:
We cannot will if we are not called, and when, after the call, we
have willed, our will and our course do not suffice, if God does not
give strength to the mnners and lead whither He calls. It is clear,
therefore, that it is not of him who wills or of him who runs but of God
showing mercy (Rom. 9:16) that we do mercy. (Qtd. in Bonner,
"Pelagianism" 37)
This view denied the mortal's freedom to choose the good and
thereby suggested that mortals cannot have genuine moral responsibility.
54 Eric Austin Madsen
On this basis, Pelagians accused Augustine of not being able to shake off
bis Manicbaean past. They alleged that Augustine still believed that
humans are not responsible for their sins. Augustine's refined view placed
him in a vulnerable position. Had Augustine returned to bis debate
against the Manicbees at the end of bis life, it would have been extremely
difficult for bim to allege their theological inconsistency, that of denying
human responsibility and insisting upon the need for repentance. The
implications of bis own mature position were remarkably similar.
However, we must emphasize that Augustine maintained the
integrity of bis free will defense. Indeed, we may argue that be did not
abandon the defense at all. Although bis views on human will in general
changed radically, be maintained that Adam,E ve, and angels all enjoyed
the most exquisite type of free will while they were in their pre-fallen
states. Augustine still could have employed bis defense with exactly the
same impact as in bis first encounter with the Manicbees. The argument
for the rationality of God's sovereign rule and goodness was just as sound
after bis conflict with the Pelagians as it was during bis debate with the
Manicbees. By relinquishing bis views on the scope of human freedom in
bis dispute against the Pelagians, Augustine did nothing to jeopardize bis
perception of God as the sovereign ruler. Indeed, bis purpose was to
strengthen this perception by showing that there is no good thing for which
God does not have total responsibility. When faced with abandoning one
of two theological positions, Augustine chose to deny mortal will rather
than diminish in any way his carefully sought portrayal of God. His praise
of God simply transcended his concern for man.
Conclusion: The Unity in Augustine's Thought
The satisfying result that we may take from the foregoing analysis
is that Augustine did not arbitrarily waver in his theological positions.
Rather, from his conflicts with the Manicbees, throughout his final
debates with the Pelagians, Augustine was single minded and focused on
glorifying God in every attribute that might be assigned to Him. Readers
of both his free will defense and his subsequent alteration of that defense
must realize that Augustine's views on free will resulted from a much
larger theological framework. Confusion and misunderstanding of
Augustine's theology result from considering in isolation from other
God's Sovereignty 55
matters the arguments that Augustine used to support his deeper pur
poses. Seeking out his more fundamental purposes assists in clarifying his
ideas. I have argued that one of these purposes consisted of Augustine's
unwavering resolve to attribute only the most dignified qualities to the
Creator, and, above all, to defend the rationality of affirming God's
sovereign rule. This approach lends greater coherency to the whole of
Augustine's astoundingly complex thought.
56 Eric Austin Madsen
Works Cited
Augustine. Confessions. Trans. R. S. Pine-Coffin. London: Penguin,
1961.
. On Christian Doctrine. Great Books of the Western World. Vol. 18.
Ed. Robert Maynard Hutchins. Trans. J. F. Shaw. Chicago:
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1952. 621-98.
. On Free Choice of the Will, Retractions (in part). Trans. Anna S.
Benjamin and L. S. Hackstaff. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1964.
Bahcock, William S." Augustine on Sin and Moral Agency." The Journal
of Religious Ethics 16 (1988): 28-55.
Bonner, Gerald. "Augustine and Pelagianism." Augustinian Studies 24
(1993): 27-47.
. St. Augustine of Hippo: Life and Controversies. Norwalk, CT:
Easton Press, 1995.
Brown, Peter. Augustine of Hippo. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1967.
Bums, J. Patout. "Augustine on the Origin and Progress of Evil." Journal
of Religious Ethics 16 (1988): 9-27.
Greer, Rowan A." Augustine's Transformation of the Free Will Defense."
Faith artd Philosophy 13 (1996): 471-86.
O'Donnell, James J. "Augustine's Idea of God." Augustinian Studies 25
(1994): 25-36.
Scheppard, Carol. "The Transmission of Sin in the Seed: A Debate
between Augustine of Hippo and Julian of Eclanum." Augustinian
Studies 27 (1996): 99-108.
You, Sung-Keun. "Why Are There Sinners?" International Journal for
Philosophy of Religion 37 (1995): 1-12.