Aporiavol. 16 no. 2—2006
Why the Direct Argument for Incompatibilism is
not Actually Direct
STEPHENMAHAFFEY
I
n recent years proponents of the view that causal determinism and
moral responsibility are incompatible have increasingly employed a so-
called "Direct Argument" in support of their position. This argument
bears this name because it contrasts with other incompatibilist arguments
that begin with an attempt to show that causal determinism is incompati-
ble with any person having the freedom to act otherwise than they actually
do. These arguments can be deemed 'indirect' because, in order to yield the
incompatibilist conclusion, they require additional argumentation to estab-
lish the truth of the Principle of Alternate Possibilities (PAP). This means
that indirect incompatibilist arguments only work if it can be demonstrated
that people must have the freedom to act otherwise than they actually do
in order to be judged morally responsible for their performed actions. This
requirement is a concern for incompatibilists because Frankfurt-type objec-
tions to PAP have effectively shown that the truth of this principle is prob-
lematic. The Direct Argument, on the other hand, is designed to be a proof
of the incompatibilist thesis that does not rely upon contentious arguments
about what moral responsibility requires. This paper will question whether
the Direct Argument can establish the incompatibilist thesis in the way it
is claimed to. To do this I will first examine John Martin Fischer and Mark
Ravizza's criticism of the Direct Argument and detail the potent incom-
patibilist response to it. I will then argue that one can craft a counterex-
ample to the Direct Argument that is impervious to the response directed
at Fischer and Ravizza. Using this result, I will argue that the counterex-
ample can only be answered by incompatibilists if it can be established that
Stephen Mahaffey is a student at the University of Calgary studying philosophy.
He plans to pursue a PhD in moral philosophy upon graduation..
38 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
PAP is true. Hence, I will attempt to show that the Direct Argument is no
less 'indirect' than the arguments which normally bear that description; a
result which entails that the Direct Argument is highly vulnerable to
Frankfurt-type objections to PAP.
It is, of course, necessary to begin this essay by laying out the Direct
Argument. This argument relies upon a proposed-to-be-valid inference
principle which is very similar to some employed by incompatibilists in the
aforementioned 'indirect' arguments. This principle is called "Transfer NR"
and can be expressed as follows:
i) If p obtains, and no one is even partly morally responsible for p;
and
ii) if p obtains, then q obtains, and no one is even partly morally
responsible for the fact that if p then q; then
iii) q obtains, and no one is even partly morally responsible for the
fact that q obtains. (Fischer and Ravizza, Responsibility and Control:
A Theory of Moral Responsibility 152)
Proponents of the Direct Argument simply suppose that causal deter-
minism is true and utilise Transfer NR1 to formulate their argument in the
way detailed below. For purposes of brevity I shall use the expression "NR"
as an abbreviation aid so that when this term is applied to a true proposi-
tion, p, describing some occurrence at a time, t, the completed statement
means:
NR(p): p, and no person is even partly morally responsible for the
fact that p.
The Direct Argument for incompatibilism can now be portrayed in
three steps (with E referring to any action/event at some time t):
1) NR(The distant past and the laws of nature obtain).
2) NR(If the distant past and laws of nature obtain, then E occurs).
3) Therefore, NR(E occurs), (by application of Transfer NR to 2 and
3).1
Incompatibilists claim that this argument is the uninterrupted, self-
contained proof that no one is morally responsible for any action if causal
determinism is true. Clearly, the argument's essential thrust is the claim
that Transfer NR is a valid rule of inference, for (3) follows from (1) and (2)
purely on the grounds that this principle is valid. The second thrust of the
1I am deeply indebted to Dr. Ishtiyaque H. Haji for his help with formalizing many of the argu-
ments mentioned in this essay.
THEDIRECTARGUMENTFORINCOMPATIBILISM 39
argument is simply the claim that (1) and (2) are true for any event2 if
causal determinism is true, which entails that (3) is true for any event if
causal determinism is true. It is in this manner that the Direct Argument
argues for incompatibilism, for if the conclusion, "Therefore, NR(E
occurs)" is true for every event, then incompatibilism is undeniable. Quite
appropriately, there are two ways in which the argument can be criticized.
One can try to show, in a bid to exclude Transfer NR from being utilised
by the argument, that one of (1) or (2) (or both) can be false when causal
determinism is assumed to be true, or one can attempt to show that
Transfer NR is not a valid rule of inference.
However, the first way in which the argument can be attacked is
entirely fruitless. To see that this is so, it is useful to note that Causal deter-
minism can be roughly expressed as the theory that the state of the world
at some time t entails, in conjunction with the laws of nature, all future
events after t. This means that any current event is understood as being a
causal entailment of the state of the world in the distant past and the laws
of nature. Thus, the conditional contained in (2) must be true if causal
determinism is assumed to be true because it is just an expression of the
assumption that causal determinism is true. Therefore, since it cannot be
plausibly denied that no one (at least no person) could be morally respon-
sible for the truth of causal determinism, the complete premise (2) appears
unimpeachable. For similar reasons, the proposition contained in (1) (the
sentence sans NR qualifier) also cannot be false if causal determinism is
assumed to be true, as the theory of causal determinism assumes that there
are long-past events (which occurred before the dawn of humanity) and
laws of nature. Consequently, since clearly no one (at least no meek and
mortal being) can be morally responsible for the fact that past events and
the laws of nature are as they are, (1) also seems to be unquestionable. If
one draws these thoughts together, what is clear is that both (1) and (2) are
beyond reproach.
This then is the challenge for compatibilist theorists: can it be shown
that Transfer NR is invalid? One attempt to defeat the Direct Argument by
meeting this challenge was made by John Martin Fischer and Mark Ravizza.
2In this paper I will generally use "event" synecdochically and so refer with it to events, actions,
consequences, omissions etc. In other words, I shall use "event" to refer to all those occurrences
in the world that agents can be morally responsible for.
40 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
They propose a case, called "Erosion", where a secret agent, living in a world
where causally undetermined choice is possible, is trying to destroy an
enemy base nestled at the base of a huge glaciated mountain face. To per-
form her mission the agent places explosives in the glacier so that when she
detonates them at time t1 an avalanche occurs and flattens the enemy base
at time t3. However, the glacier is naturally eroding and had she not deto-
nated the explosives at t1, a natural avalanche would have occurred at time
t2 and demolished the enemy base at t3. Using this scenario, Fischer and
Ravizza craft the following two premises (modified with the abbreviation
"NR" for sake of conciseness again):
1a) NR(The glacier is eroding).
2a) NR(If the glacier is eroding, then there is an avalanche that
crushes the enemy base at t3). (Eleonore Stump, "The Direct
Argument for Incompatibilism" 460)3
Fischer and Ravizza argue that these two premises are correct given
the scenario in play. The first premise is beyond reproach and the second
premise expresses a true causal relation for which it is clear that no one is
morally responsible. Given the truth of these two premises, it seems that
Transfer NR would entail the conclusion:
3a)Therefore, NR(There is an avalanche that crushes the enemy base
at t3).
However, the argument is that this conclusion is clearly false because
the secret agent chose to detonate the explosives at t1 and so it is only plau-
sible to think that she is morally responsible for the camp's annihilation.
Consequently, it seems as if Transfer NR cannot be a valid rule of inference
because it yields this obviously false conclusion from true premises. As a
result, the direct argument for incompatibilism appears to have been
defeated by Fischer and Ravizza's example.
There is, however, there is an important difference with the case pro-
posed by Fischer and Ravizza. This difference is that their example is a case
of overdetermination where two entirely independent pathways4 are con-
currently working to bring about the occurrence of the same event. To put
it differently, in Erosion there is overdetermination of the avalanche
3This article will be cited by the author’s last name followed by the page number.
4By "pathway" or "path" I simply mean a way or manner in which an event can come to pass.
Thus, I use the words to refer to any process, procedure, chain of events etc. that causes or leads
to some resultant event.
THEDIRECTARGUMENTFORINCOMPATIBILISM 41
because at t1 the secret agent was causing the slide while the natural ava-
lanche causing process of the glacier's movement was in progress. Thus, the
secret agent's actions and the glacier's natural movement were simultane-
ously operating to cause the avalanche. In addition, cases like Erosion are
distinguished by the fact that the overdetermination is unique because one
path is such that examination of it in isolation would indicate to one that
no agent is morally responsible for the resultant event, while the other path
is such that after similar examination in isolation it seems only plausible to
suppose that some agent is morally responsible for the same resultant event
(Fischer and Ravizza, “Replies” 447). In such cases (called "two-path" cases
by Fischer and Ravizza) the general strategy being employed against the
Direct Argument is to express the path which indicates that no one is
morally responsible for the result in the premises (1a and 2a) of the argu-
ment, while leaving the path which indicates that someone seems clearly to
be morally responsible for the result unmentioned. Given transfer NR, the
conclusive event which culminates the path expressed in the argument
should be such that no one is morally responsible for it, but because this
event is concurrently or pre-emptively overdetermined by the unmentioned
path, it seems that the only plausible thing to say is that it is true that some-
one is morally responsible for this event. In contrast, one-path cases are
those cases that do not have two paths overdetermining an event such that
only one path indicates that someone is morally responsible for the event.
To put it succinctly, in one-path cases there is no overdetermination of the
very specific sort imagined by Fischer and Ravizza.
The fact that Fischer and Ravizza's apparent counterexample to
Transfer NR is a two-path case is important because Eleonore Stump has
voiced a very interesting and effective defence of the Direct Argument
which hinges upon this feature of Erosion (and its counterparts). To put it
in schematic form, her argument is that these examples fail to defeat the
direct argument because all cases when causal determinism is assumed to
be true will be one-path cases (Stump 465–466). Hence, while Erosion is an
effective refutation of Transfer NR, this inference principle can be easily
modified to yield a new version that only applies to one-path cases. This
modification, she believes, will exclude all cases exhibiting the particular
overdetermination Fischer and Ravizza imagine, while still driving the
42 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
Direct Argument by including all cases where causal determinism is
assumed to be true. Her argument relies upon the idea that, in a causally
determined world, all paths leading to an event can be placed in a causal
chain leading back to occurrences in the distant past (Stump 465). Thus, all
pathways and their culminating events should be understood as causally
issuing from a conjunction of past events and natural laws. The conclusion
which Stump claims to follow from this realization is that there is no event
about which one can think that someone is clearly morally responsible for
its occurrence. This is because to assume that someone is morally respon-
sible for an event in a causally determined universe is to beg the question
against incompatibilists. As a result, the special sort of overdetermination
present in two-path cases cannot be thought to exist when causal deter-
minism is assumed to be true, for one of the pathways required for such
two-path overdetermination cannot be supposed to be present without beg-
ging the question against incompatibilists. Indeed, since all paths will bear
the mark of causal determination, there can only be one-path cases when
causal determinism is assumed to be true.
Stump maintains that all this argumentation results in the realization
that two-path counterexamples to Transfer NR are irrelevant to the Direct
Argument because they do not address cases in which causal determinism
is assumed to be true. Such counterexamples may invalidate Transfer NR,
but it is easy to create a restricted form of Transfer NR that only applies to
one-path cases (Stump 466). Using this restricted inference principle the
Direct Argument can still run because cases where causal-determinism is
true are one-path cases. This new and restricted principle is known as
Transfer NR1 and is as follows:
(i) If p obtains, and no one is even partly morally responsible for p;
and
(ii) if p obtains, then q obtains, and no one is even partly morally
responsible for the fact that if p obtains, then q obtains; and
(iii) if the pathway implicated in (ii) is the one pathway (in the rele
vant sense) of q's obtaining; then
(iv) q obtains, and no one is even partly morally responsible for this
fact.
THEDIRECTARGUMENTFORINCOMPATIBILISM 43
This new principle is employed in exactly the same way the original
one was to yield the incompatibilist conclusion. The only difference is that
this time two-path counterexamples are entirely spurious. Consequently, it
seems as if the Direct Argument still stands as a very simple way of proving
incompatibilism.
To defeat the Direct Argument then, one must invalidate Transfer
NR1 by providing a one-path counterexample to it. Happily for compati-
bilists, Transfer NR1 seems to suggest that an invalidating example can be
devised. To demonstrate this, imagine a world where casual determinism is
false and people have the ability to make undetermined choices.
Furthermore, consider a scenario where an outwardly ordinary man, Bob,
who possesses a choice faculty like the one described, has had the misfor-
tune to be unknowingly exposed to a very strange form of cosmic radiation.
This radiation has, unbeknownst to him, caused his brain to develop a
very bizarre abnormality. If lightning strikes within 200m of Bob at some
time t1, then the electrical field can fully 'mature' the abnormality and so
begin a causal process in Bob's brain that turns him into a choiceless
automaton and causes him to murder the next person he comes across at
some time tn. In fact, let us suppose that the lightning strike will 'mature'
the abnormality, and thereby turn Bob into a murdering automaton,
unless, at t1, Bob chooses to murder the next person he meets at tn. In
other words, due to some peculiar aspect of Bob's brain abnormality, his
choice of this murderous action at the moment of the lightning strike
results in a brain state that somehow nullifies the lightning's effect upon
the abnormality and prevents this malformation from initiating the causal
process that turns him into murdering automaton. Let us also suppose that
there are no subsequent lightning strikes after t1 that could affect his brain
abnormality. Let us now make this situation of Bob's even more sinister
and suppose that, having made such a choice at t1, if he later recants his
decision and decides not to murder the next person he encounters, then
the brain state corresponding to this undetermined recantation somehow
reactivates and 'matures' his brain abnormality so that a causal process that
will force him to commit a murderous action at tn is once more initiated.
Unfortunately for Bob, we must make the case even more twisted
and insidious by supposing that when Bob was a child, a rogue neurologist
44 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
identified him as being at great risk to one day decide to murder the next
person he met. In response to this finding, the neurologist covertly
installed a small nano-device in Bob's brain (unbeknownst to him of
course) which prevented him from choosing such a murderous action.
Now, imagine that this device is effective but has one major flaw. The
device is very sensitive to strong positive charges, just like the very strong
positive charge exhibited by the area of a lightning strike moments before
the actual bolt descends. Let us imagine that this device is so vulnerable to
positive charge that if lightning were to strike a point at some time t, this
device would succumb to the strong positive charge present at t-1 if the
device were within 200m of the lightning's strike point. This malfunction-
ing would thereby leave the device's host free to choose a homicidal act at
the next moment in time; which happens to be t. Thus, at a time t (if we
assume that Bob has never been close to a lightning strike before) Bob is
able to choose to murder the next person he sees only if lightning strikes
within 200m of him at t.
The summation of this scenario is that Bob has no alternative but to
murder the next person he encounters if lightning strikes within 200m of
him. Interestingly though, this murderous action can be the result of either
his undetermined choice or an unavoidable causal process in his brain
which is itself caused by the lightning and his abnormality. Using this imag-
ined scenario we can create a very interesting case. In this case suppose
that lightning strikes within 200m of Bob for the first time at t1. We shall
also imagine is that at t1, Bob makes an undetermined choice to murder
the next person he comes across at some time tn; a decision he never
recants. With these suppositions and the aforementioned scenario, the fol-
lowing argument can be crafted (with the term "NR1" performing the same
role as "NR" did in the previous arguments, except this new term expresses
that Transfer NR1, not Transfer NR, is in use):
1b) NR1(Lightning strikes within 200m of Bob at t1).
2b) NR1(If lightning strikes within 200m of Bob at t1, then Bob mur
ders the next person he comes across at tn).
If Transfer NR1 is valid, the following conclusion would seem to
issue from these premises:
3b) Therefore, NR1(Bob murders the next person he comes across at
time tn).
THEDIRECTARGUMENTFORINCOMPATIBILISM 45
However, this conclusion is false. Bob made an undetermined choice
at t1 to murder the next person he came across; so it is only plausible that
Bob is morally responsible for his murderous action. Thus, Transfer NR1
is invalid because it yields this wrong conclusion from true premises.
However, one must consider the possible objections to this case before
declaring a victory over the Direct Argument. If the premises of the case
can be proven false or the entire case shown to be irrelevant5, then the case
of Bob would fail to block incompatibilists.
To begin this discussion of possible responses to this case, the truth
of the two premises is difficult to dispute. Premise (1b) is undeniably true
because the lightning strikes and it is clear that no one is morally respon-
sible for the lightning strike. Bob might well be responsible for building his
house in its location and for sitting down to read where he does, but he is
certainly not responsible for the lightning striking within 200m of him.
The truth of premise (2b) is perhaps less straightforward, but is no less cer-
tain. When the lightning strikes at t1, Bob cannot avoid murdering (or
attempting to murder) someone at tn. It is true that he can freely choose to
murder or be forced as a mindless automaton to murder the next person
encounters, but he cannot avoid this action once lightning strikes within
200m of him. This is because if, as the lightning strikes, he does not freely
choose his murderous action, then he is caused to perform it by the light-
ning's influence on his brain abnormality. The only way he can avoid being
forced to perform such an action is by choosing to perform this same mur-
derous action. Therefore, the conditional contained in (2b) is true because
it is an expression of the fact that Bob has no alternative to murdering
once the lightning strikes. With this point established, one can also see
that no one is morally responsible for the truth of the conditional con-
tained in (2b). To be morally responsible for (2b) a person would have to
be responsible for the fact that Bob must murder the next person he comes
across after the lightning strikes. This is impossible, though, as Bob cannot
but perform this homicidal action because of his brain abnormality.
Therefore, the truth of (2b) cannot be denied and, as a result, it is not pos-
sible to reject the case of Bob by denying the truth of its premises.
5If one could demonstrate that the conclusion yielded by Transfer NR1* in the case of Bob is true,
then one would surely have defended the Direct Argument. However, I see no way in which this
could be done without begging the question by taking the quite unjustified view that people can-
not be morally responsible for their actions even if these actions are not causally determined.
46 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
The next potential objection is the argument that this case is a spu-
rious two-path case just like Erosion. If this is so, then clearly the case of
Bob is just another failed attempt to defeat the direct argument which only
manages to defeat Transfer NR. Bob's case, however, is not a two-path case.
There is no overdetermination of Bob's murderous action like there was of
the camp's destruction in Erosion. Admittedly, there seems to be two pos-
sible pathways that lead to his murderous action, for Bob can choose this
action or be forced by his brain abnormality to perform it. Moreover, one
path indicates that no one is morally responsible for the resultant event;
while the other path indicates that someone is morally responsible for the
result. However, in the case of Bob these two pathways cannot be concur-
rently active in the way two paths are assumed to be in Erosion. Remember
that if Bob freely chooses at t1 to murder, then the causal process issuing
from his brain abnormality never begins and he is in no way caused or
forced to perform the action. Similarly, if his brain abnormality causes him
to murder, then he does not choose this action. In other words, if he does
not freely choose his action at t1, then the causal process at work in his
brain renders him an automaton unable to make any choices after this
time. What should also be clear is that, before t1, the nano-device in Bob's
brain simply prevented him from ever choosing to murder the next person
he encountered. Thus, these two pathways cannot concurrently be in effect
and only one actually leads to Bob's action. In any imagined scenario then,
there can be no overdetermination of Bob's action.
The absence of overdetermination in this case may be enough to dif-
ferentiate it from a two-path case. However, it might still be argued that this
scenario is not a one-path case because while these two pathways cannot
concurrently operate, they are nonetheless two bona-fide paths which can
lead to Bob's murderous action and one pathway indicates that Bob is
morally responsible for his action. Consequently, the case of Bob is a two-
path case regardless of whether these paths concurrently operate. As a sec-
ond objection, critics might also question the relevancy of this case because
neither of the two pathways is mentioned in premise (2b); which appears
to be a direct breach of condition (iii) of Transfer NR1. Both of these
counter-arguments, however, misunderstand the nature of Bob's case. Both
objections are faulty because they fail to realize that the lightning strike at
THEDIRECTARGUMENTFORINCOMPATIBILISM 47
t1 is ultimately what necessitates Bob's murderous action. Indeed, the cir-
cumstances of the case are such that Bob could not have chosen to murder
the next person he encountered at any time before the lightning strike
allowed him to make such a choice at t1. To respond to the first objection,
when recognition of the primacy of the lightning strike is combined with
the already demonstrated fact that there is no overdetermination in this
case, it becomes clear that only one pathway is present in the case of Bob's
homicidal act. This is because any pathway leading to his action must begin
with the lightning strike and the two seeming pathways cannot both begin
with such because they cannot be active concurrently. Hence, the lightning
strike either makes it possible for him to choose this action and he does so
choose, or the lightning causes his action via his brain abnormality. Thus,
there are not two pathways present in the case of Bob at all, just one path-
way originating with the lightning strike that can take one of two possible
forms, depending upon Bob's undetermined choices at t1. The illusory
thought Bob's case is a two-path case springs from the fact that the single
pathway which leads to Bob attempting homicide can simply be different
(having two different routes of expression) in cases with different circum-
stances. Therefore, what this arguments shows is that the case of Bob is
actually a one-path case and it cannot be objected to using Stump's argu-
ments against two-path cases.
The second objection was that the case is deficient because neither of
the two pathways which lead to Bob's action are expressed in premise (2b).
However, the argument above established that these two pathways were
simply an illusion and that only one pathway can lead to Bob's attempted
murderous act. Moreover, this single pathway issues from or begins with
the lightning strike at t1, for the lightning strike is what necessitates Bob's
action. Consequently, premise (2b) of the argument does express the path-
way leading to Bob's act when it states that if lightning strikes within 200m
of Bob at some time, then Bob will murder the next person he encounters.
This is because, while the details of the pathway are not fixed, it is never-
theless undeniable that the lightning strike is ultimately the source or
beginning of the pathway leading to the act in question. As a result, (2b)
does sufficiently express the pathway at work in the case of Bob, which
means that this case does comply with condition (iii) of Transfer NR1 and
is a relevant counterexample to this principle.
48 STEPHENMAHAFFEY
The case of Bob may be resistant to criticism so far, but there is one
very interesting and potentially problematic feature of this scenario. This
feature is that the lightning strike at t1 ensures that Bob has no freedom to
perform an act other than murdering the next person he comes across at
some time tn. He truly has no alternative possibilities once the lightning
strikes within 200m of him. Clearly then, if the Principle of Alternate
Possibilities (PAP) is true, then it is obvious that Bob is not morally respon-
sible for his murderous action. Hence, a new inference principle, Transfer
NR1p, which includes the assumption that PAP is true, could be proposed.
If valid, this principle would still drive the Direct Argument, while also
entailing that Bob is not morally responsible for his action. In other words,
it could be argued that this case is a totally ineffective response to the direct
argument because it addresses an unnecessary inference principle. Of
course, this possible method of responding to cases like Bob's would only
work if PAP was unimpeachably true. Thus, it seems that the question of
whether the Direct Argument can be successful depends on whether or
not PAP is true. Unluckily for incompatibilists, this question is by no
means answered in their favour as Frankfurt-type examples form a collec-
tion of potent and not successfully refuted arguments against PAP.
Therefore, incompatibilists must somehow demonstrate that PAP is true
before they can hope to think that the direct argument is successful. Until
such is proven, the Direct Argument is as vulnerable to Frankfurt-type
examples as the previously mentioned 'indirect' incompatibilist arguments
are. With this fact in mind, if one considers why the Direct Argument has
become popular, then it becomes clear that it is already a failure. This is
because it was originally designed to prove the incompatibilist thesis with-
out requiring additional argumentation in support of the thesis that moral
responsibility requires alternate possibilities. What I have argued is that
the direct argument does not actually escape such concerns, for only
through positive argumentation for PAP can potent counterexamples like
the case of Bob be nullified. This should not really be a surprise. It was
always strange to think that an argument could establish the incompatibil-
ity of causal determinism and moral responsibility without attempting to
deal with the question of what is required for a person to be morally
responsible for an action she performs.
Works Cited
Fischer, John Martin and Mark Ravizza. Responsibility and Control: A
Theory of Moral Responsibility. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998
——— "Replies." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research61:2 (2000):
467–480.
Stump, Eleonore. "The Direct Argument for Incompatibilism."
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research61:2 (2000): 459–466