Aporia vol. 17 no. 2—2007
Bad Attitudes: Rethinking the Role of
Propositional Attitudes in Cognitive Science
Jonathan Martin
Introduction
M ental representation is a central concept in cognitive science. It is the
causal story involving “symbolic structures” that form the explanatory
schema of classical cognitive science. Objects that populate the particular
ontology of a scientific theory must have an instrumental role in explaining
the processes in question. As such, it is requisite that the explanatory vehi-
cles within a theory be in some way informative with regards to a particular
inquiry. Due to this methodological presupposition, the entities invoked in
a theory can be evaluated in terms of their explanatory value or their status
as causal-explanatory entities altogether. In pursuing a more explanatory
cognitive science, I will be advancing an eliminative program which ad-
dresses the need for representational language but questions the status of
propositional attitudes as causal objects in computational explanations.
Propositional attitudes are sentences consisting of an intensional verb
followed by a content clause; for example, “x believes that y.” It is not my
aim simply to reiterate Paul Churchland’s claim that folk psychology is an
empirical theory (and thus falsifiable). Rather, I will show that (1) proposi-
tional attitudes as causal entities are inadequate and largely uninformative
for explaining representation computationally; and (2) understanding the
dynamics of networks of neurons (though I will rely on artificial models)
with relation to representation will require description in non-propositional
terms using a dynamic neurobiological model. I will argue that the func-
tional story, which will inform us about how the brain represents, will be
Jonathan Martin is a senior majoring in philosophy at the College of Wooster and is
currently applying for graduate programs in philosophy. His academic interests are
cognitive science, philosophy of mind, and philosophy of science.
34 Jonathan Martin
concerned with causal neurobiological functions and will most likely ac-
count for representation in a highly non-propositional way.
Classical Minds: Folk Psychology and Propositional Attitudes
The accounts of the mind in classical cognitive science (of which
Fodor’s language of thought hypothesis is paradigmatic) have been commit-
ted to two fundamental propositions: (A) mental content is determined by
the causal effects and input/output relations of a representational system;
and (B) the causal story of A is best described in the language of propo-
sitional attitudes (PAs). I will focus on B. Formulations of mental events
under this framework take the form of citing certain intensional states (be-
liefs, desires, hopes, etc.) as explanations for behavior. For example, it is
Jack’s desire to drive, together with his belief that his car is in the garage,
that explains why he grabs his keys and heads to the garage. Though this
action is surely dependent on other intensional states (he believes that his
keys are necessary to start the car), the rough picture of this view of the
mind should be clear. One can even present predictive counterfactuals such
as “If Jack wanted to take a ride and believed his car was in the garage, but
also believed that cars are very likely to explode at any moment, he would not
grab his keys and head to the garage.” The explanatory ability of giving such
propositional reasons as causes, at first glance, seems obvious. Indeed, it is
hard to conceive of what a denial of these reasons might even mean.
Still, there are further commitments of classicism to reveal before we
proceed. One important commitment is noted by Andy Clark:
The folk framework provides both a model of our compu-
tational organization and a set of contents [propositional
attitudes] which have reasonably close analogues in the
inner economy . . . [such that] strings of inner symbols
can stand in sufficiently close relation to the contents
cited in ordinary mentalistic discourse for us to speak
of such contents’ being tokened in the string and having
causal powers in virtue of the causal powers of the string.
(Associative Engines 6)
The classical view in cognitive science is committed to a system of “syntacti-
cally structured representations . . . [in which] the computational processes
. . . can be described by transition or derivation rules” (46). While clas-
sicists such as Fodor might insist there should be only the requirement of
a correspondence between a PA’s proposition and the representational and
structural processes of a cognitive system, the causal efficacy of these sen-
tences in the brain is indispensable to the classical picture.
Bad attitudes 35
Concepts, Recombination, and Systematicity
As established, the classical cognitive scientist describes the inner
workings of the human mind as a series of operations over syntactically de-
fined representational states. Andy Clark cites a good, working definition
from Newell and Simon:
A physical-symbol system . . . is a physical device that
contains a set of interpretable and combinable items
(symbols) and a set of processes that can operate on
the items (copying, conjoining, creating, and destroying
them according to instructions). (Mindware 28)
The model of classical cognitive science takes its power from the general
usefulness and breadth of abilities realized on serial processing computers
(which are syntactic, physical-symbol systems) and the knack people seem
to have for recombining words and concepts. For example, anyone who has
the concept of a bird should be able to imagine a bird in different places
(in a bush, in a person’s hand, etc.). Thus, concepts are said to be atomistic
in that they can be used in multiple domains or recombined scenarios. If
one can understand “Sarah found the bear” then one should be able to
understand “the bear found Sarah.”
Another strength of the classical paradigm is that it provides a straight-
forward answer to the issue of the systematicity of cognition. Because of
the symbolic nature of the representations in classical theories, systematic
abilities (such as logic) are easily put into propositional form. For example,
if David knows that all triangles have three sides and he knows that x is a
triangle, then ceteris paribus he knows that x has three sides. The property
of systematicity plays a large role in accounting for cognition in classical
computational cognitive science because it provides a picture of what types
of mental contents there are as well as the different kinds of computational
transition rules that might be part of the computational hardware. This
is meant to show why a person who comprehends “Kelly is a sister” and
“sisters are female” will be able to deduce that Kelly is a girl. While the
explanatory weight of this propositional view of mental content is clear, I
will now address some objections to this view.
A Major Position on PAs and Objections
Though it is my intention to reject PAs as part of explanatory cog-
nitive science, there are a few major positions which offer reasons for
retaining these entities.
36 Jonathan Martin
Fodor’s Realism
Jerry Fodor’s Language of Thought Hypothesis relies on the claim
that PAs are the only possible causal constituents of explanatory cogni-
tive theories. As such, he is committed to the idea that the ontology of
PAs (beliefs, desires, fears, etc.) traces real symbolic entities in an “inner”
computational economy. He states that functional cognitive states must
be described as law-like relations between PAs, for explanations below the
propositional level lose essential functional significance. He writes that
having a propositional attitude is being in some rela-
tion to an internal representation. In particular, having
a propositional attitude is being in some computational
relation to an internal representation. . . . It won’t be
possible to construct a psychology of the kind that I
have been envisioning unless organisms have pertinent
descriptions as instantiations of some or other formal
system . . . that for each propositional attitude . . . there
is some causal state of the organism such that . . . the
state is interpretable as a relation to a formula of the for-
mal system, and . . . being in the state is nomologically
necessary and sufficient for . . . having the propositional
attitude. (198–99)
This statement leaves us with a fairly clear picture of how Fodor ex-
pects to vindicate our causal-propositional theories. According to this view,
there are nomological relations between the structures of certain proposi-
tions and the inner symbols of a syntactic computational system. These
relations and causal effects are generally consistent with the expectations
of folk psychology. For example, suppose Karen believes it will snow to-
night and also fears it will snow tonight. These two states are, on Fodor’s
account, two different causal effects of the same symbolic representational
items. The representation must, according to Fodor, bear causal relation-
ships appropriate to belief in one case, and fear in the other.
Objection 1 to Fodor’s Realism
Jerry Fodor provides a clear idea of realism regarding the status of
propositional attitudes. If his position is correct, then folk psychological
explanations and predictions work because they give an accurate account
of the computational states of cognitive functioning. But if the ontology of
folk psychology is basically accurate and the explanations and prediction
using PAs are dependent on this essential accuracy, then it seems we must
be able to provide nomological relationships between the posits of folk
psychological cognitive explanations. In other words, if folk psychology is
Bad attitudes 37
an accurate account of the causal/computational states of cognition, then
there must be law-like relations between certain mental contents. When
the consequences of folk psychological predictions are not due to law-like
relations, then they must be logical or analytic implications. Assuming that
a certain bit of knowledge allows one to explain or predict certain out-
comes, there must be nomological regularities that make the predictions or
explanations informative. But if such implications are analytic, then the re-
sults of such predictions would be scientifically uninformative; one would
be able to explain a state of affairs or predict an outcome purely through
conceptual analysis with no need for empirical data.
In the pursuit of demonstrating that folk psychology is an empirical
theory, Paul Churchland provides several comparisons between folk psy-
chological predictions and familiar theories in physics:
(1) if (x) (f) (m) [((x has a mass of m) & (x suffers a net
force of f)) then (x accelerates at f/m)].
(2) if (x) (p) [(x fears that p) then (x desires that p)].
~
(3) if (x) (p) (q) [((x desires that p) & (x believes that (if q
then p)) & (x is able to bring it about that q) then (bar-
ring conflicting desires or preferred strategies, x brings it
about that q)]. (Philosophy of Mind 570)
There is clearly a structural similarity in the relation of the implications
Churchland uses to formulate these theories. But let us look at (2), as it is
the most simple of his folk psychological theories. What is the relationship
between x’s fear that p and x’s desire that p? It seems that this might be an
~
analytic implication, as “fear that p” might conceptually include the “desire
that p.” If this is the case, then we are not making an important prediction
~
or comprehending the relationship between two states, because both states
are redescriptions of the same state (to fear p is to desire that p). I will cre-
~
ate a new law involving PAs that should further explicate this problem:
(4) if (x)(p) (x hopes that p) & (x finds that p) then (ceteris
paribus, x is pleased).
This relationship should hold in all cases of wishing and hoping,
given ceteris paribus (all things being equal) conditions hold. But does this
relationship hold because of nomological relations between hoping and be-
ing pleased or because the implication is analytic? Another consideration
relevant to the empirical acceptability of folk psychological theories is that
the theories rely heavily on ceteris paribus clauses (barring confusion, higher
motives, etc.) and require that the attitudes (for example, wishing that x and
being pleased that x) are conceptually and logically distinct. Here, we can
38 Jonathan Martin
ask some questions about the similarities and differences between these
theories. Could force turn out to be something other than mass × accel-
eration, or would this have been a conceptual impossibility? Observation
confirms the reliability of these physical terms and the law-like relation-
ships between these entities as they occur in physical theories. Could we
have arrived at this conclusion merely by analyzing the concept of force? To
put it simply, the truth of folk psychological theories, if this account holds,
relies on the fact that the implications are the result of analytic and not
nomological relations. The prediction that (2) makes, namely that if x fears
that p, then x desires that p, can be arrived at through conceptual analysis,
~
even in the absence of empirical observations.
Objection 2 to Fodor’s Realism
My second objection to Fodor’s propositional-computational account
deals with the notion that satisfying computational accounts of cognition
must be propositional so they do not miss the functionally significant
features of the computational system. The argument I am objecting to
is committed to the proposition that cognition is describable only at the
level of abstraction found in folk psychological/propositional language. I
shall begin with a basic example. Imagine a person playing a game of chess
(a notably advanced cognitive ability). Each turn, the player engages in a
process of deliberation in which a number of important cognitive abilities
must be engaged in highly integrated ways in order to produce appropriate
reactions to given scenarios. The process (I rely on some intuitions here)
most likely involves an ability to discriminate pieces by shape. Now this
discriminative capacity will necessarily be successful in a seasoned chess
player given high levels of variation in the shape of, for example, knights.
In examples of successful discrimination, the relevant features for the iden-
tification of chess pieces’ shapes must be computationally related to the
process of identification. Since the various relevant physical features must
be identified primarily through retinal stimulation and admit to a high
degree of physical variation (shape, orientations etc.), the computational
system involved must be able to rely on a largely general discriminative
capacity for using shifting patterns in retinal input. This is only the first
step, for associating appropriate movements with given pieces is signifi-
cant in the computational processes involved in strategizing over the next
move.1 In addition, note the generality of an account of this cognitive pro-
cess citing PAs. On this account, the player’s cognitive processes are most
adequately described as a causal web of beliefs, desires, and strategies which
1As I will explore later, given the representational account in the non-propositional neuro-
computational view (analysis of activation patterns, prototypicality judgments, etc.), the types of
discriminative capacities and associative abilities here are well accounted for.
Bad attitudes 39
are nomologically related and produce causal effects roughly identical to
our ordinary expectations. So let us cash out the intensional story which
cites PAs. The player desires to put the opponent in check, believes certain
strategies might work, and has sufficient beliefs about the shapes of pieces
and their appropriate movements. But this account, at the propositional
level of abstraction, would be true of any system capable of playing chess,
no matter what goes on computationally in order to achieve the relevant
cognitive task. Deep Blue, the famous chess-playing computer, and the hu-
man brain play chess successfully by virtue of entirely different types of
computation. The intensional psychology of PAs, however, could be used
with equal predictive success.
It does not take much analysis of the folk psychological explanation
of what the player is doing and representing to see that the predictions and
descriptions given are superficial, uninteresting, and not explanatory. In
fact, it is the level of abstraction (cited by Fodor for the indispensability
of PAs) that makes the theoretical success of PA attribution irrelevant to
understanding anything but the most general computational features of
a cognitive process. To put it simply, if we wish to understand how a certain
cognitive process is achieved computationally, PAs will work regardless of
the computational system involved. A person inclined toward the neuro-
computational account will be able to specify computational functioning
at a much more interesting and causally less dubious level of description.
How do we identify chess pieces (given damage, partial obstruction, and
variation across sets of pieces)? The answer, which includes a number of
beliefs (knights look like horses, are shorter than the queen, etc.), will give
a computational account of PAs, but will most likely prove inadequate
at providing truly explanatory or nomologically predictive cognitive sto-
ries. The story might still be true in some computationally uninteresting
way. The agent is described and predicted accurately as wanting to win or
strategizing that x, but the truth of these higher-level descriptions and their
predictive success must be explained at a lower level through the description
of representation and cognitive functions best defined non-propositionally.
In fact, when we look at similar examples of cognitive capacities in paral-
lel distributed processing, we will find systems which store representations
in a manner very incompatible with folk psychological descriptions and
expectations. Still, this incompatibility does not seem to have any real ef-
fect on whether the attribution of PAs works on these non-propositional
systems. The impotence of this incompatibility demonstrates my central
point. A facial recognition network can be described in folk psychologi-
cal/propositional language (“This network recognizes the face as Sarah”),
but this seems to work no matter what the causal properties of the system.
This is because the PAs describe cognition at a level of generality highly
divorced from computational or causal processes. There is, however, a more
40 Jonathan Martin
telling and satisfactory account of this cognitive ability which occurs when
we treat populations of neurons as a parallel computational system whose
functioning is non-syntactic or propositional. The fact that PA attribution
works as a tool for predicting cognition does not mean that it is a satisfac-
tory way of providing computational accounts.
Getting to Know the Artificial Neuron Network
Since my examples employ artificial neuron network research, it is
necessary for me to outline and describe the relevant features about these
types of processing systems. The Artificial Neuron Network (ANN) is a clus-
ter of interconnected individual processors which are organized into layers.
These layers are often categorized as: (1) Input Units (2) Hidden Units, and
(3) Output Units. Each input unit is respectively connected to every hidden
unit, and each hidden unit is connected to either additional hidden unit
layers or to the output units. The unit is a simple processor able to give and
receive graduated outputs of some decimal value between zero and one.
This description is admittedly simple, but it conveys the basic idea.
Now we come to what these simple processors do when their behavior
is coordinated. Researchers in neural-nets make use of learning algorithms
of which, for my purposes, only a rough introduction is needed. Through
the use of learning algorithms, researchers are able to train ANNs to rep-
resent certain significant patterns in their inputs and subsequently to give
outputs consistent with specific domains of representation. In order to do
so, the network is given a training set—a fixed group of inputs—and the
output is compared with some desired input-output relation. Over time,
the network learns by reconfiguring the weight (from zero to one) of the
connection to the other units through various methods of comparisons to
correct input-output relations. I will provide an example that further eluci-
dates this concept.
Putting a Name to a Face
Paul Churchland cites a powerful example of a three-layered network
that learned to effectively represent various relationships in its inputs to a spe-
cific cognitive domain: facial recognition. Not only could this network quite
accurately discriminate between faces and non-faces, but it could also deter-
mine the gender of the face and the person’s name. Churchland writes:
[The network’s] input layer or “retina” is a 64x64-pixel
grid whose elements each admit of 256 different levels
of activation or “brightness.” . . . [The] training set con-
tained 64 different photos of 11 different faces, plus 13
photos of nonface scenes. . . . Each input cell projects a
Bad attitudes 41
radiating set of axonal end branches to each and every
one of the 80 cells in the second layer, which . . . repre-
sents an abstract space of 80 dimensions. . . . This second
layer projects finally to an output layer of only eight cells.
(The Engine of Reason 40–41)
The final eight units of the network give outputs (albeit numerical
ones) which signify various features of the picture input. These correspond
to the picture’s being either: 1. (face/non-face) 2. (male/female) 3. (name:
Sarah [for example]). Churchland writes:
It achieved 100 percent accuracy, on the training set of
images, with respect to faceness, gender, and the identity
of the face presented. . . . A more severe and more relevant
test occurs when we present the network with photos it has
never seen before, that is, with various photos of the same
people drawn from outside the training set. Here again
the network comes through though. It identified correctly
98 percent of novel photographs of the people encoun-
tered in its training set, missing the name and gender of
only one female subject. . . . A third and highly intriguing
experiment tested the network’s ability to recognize and
identify a “familiar” person when one-fifth of the person’s
face was obscured by a horizontal bar across the input im-
age. Surprisingly, the network’s performance was hardly
impaired at all. (The Engine of Reason 45)
In this case one can see that the synaptic weightings of the network
have settled into a configuration which bears appropriate outputs to cer-
tain “visual” patterns on the input units. By this I mean that certain general
relationships in facial input patterns are reflected in the synaptic weight-
ings due to the learning process of repeated synaptic adjustment and not
computed in terms of identifying common-sense facial features. Let us look
at possible methods of understanding the processes involved in making
these impressive judgments.
The Inside Story
Before we move on to issues of mental causation, we should look at a
few of the key concepts for understanding the representational story of the
Parallel Distributed Processor.
Representational Spaces
After hearing such a result, one might wish to understand just how
this network is making these “smart” discriminations. There are a few key
ways in which the network’s “concepts” can be understood, and becom-
42 Jonathan Martin
ing familiar with these methods will reveal more about the representa-
tional story involved. By virtue of the network’s development of appropriate
connection weights, we can talk of the network as having an 80-dimensional
facial “concept space” (Churchland, The Engine of Reason 46–47). This means
that all possible faces that can be represented by the network can be located
somewhere in a geometric “space” where distance between two possible faces
will be indicative of the similarity or difference along some specific domains
which are represented by the system. Each point in such a space stands
for a specific pattern of neural activation in the network. If we were to
understand the behavior of this computational system using the resources
provided by the model of PAs, we would quickly find that this project fails
as a causal story. If one were to cite the network’s “belief that females have
eye distance/forehead proportion x” and predict the system’s outputs con-
sistently, it would live up to the expectations of the intensional stance. But
there is reason to believe that this is decidedly not a good theory of the sys-
tem’s computational processes. First, there is nothing remotely like such a
belief being represented or playing a role in the network (there are no struc-
tures which are causal by virtue of semantic content). Second, such a theory
of its computational economy would both likely fail to make interesting or
informative predictions of future behavior and will make false predictions
when tested more in depth. But perhaps most importantly, by analyzing pat-
terns in the network, “one can see immediately that each cell comprehends
the entire surface of the input layer . . . they seem to embody a variety of
decidedly holistic features or dimensions of facehood, dimensions for which
ordinary language has no adequate vocabulary” (47). But alas, though the
intuitive propositional partitioning of facial features may fail us, there are
some ways of finding what is going on within the neural network.
Learning Methods
An essential feature of ANNs is that they learn over time through
experience. How they do this depends on which type of learning algo-
rithm is used. There are a number of strategies which are used in training
ANNs, and the various strengths and weaknesses of each (as well as their
biological feasibility) are not central to my project. Still, a short example
of how such learning procedures work will shed some light on what a
neuro-computational approach to mental representations might highlight.
It seems at least that understanding both how networks in the biological
brain represent and how they change in response to experience would be of
prime importance to forging a new dynamic view of the mind. Many ANNs
learn by gradient descent learning, and Paul Churchland gives a good ex-
ample of how this procedure works:
Bad attitudes 43
Think of an abstract space of many dimensions, one for
each weight in the network . . . plus one dimension
for representing the overall error of the output vector
on any given trial. Any point in that space represents a
unique configuration of weights, plus the performance
error that the configuration produces. What the learn-
ing rule does is steadily nudge that configuration away
from erroneous positions and toward positions that are
less erroneous. The system inches its way down an “error
gradient” toward a global error minimum. Once there, it
responds reliably to the relevant [inputs]. (A Neurocompu-
tational Perspective 166–67)
There are reasons to believe that this sort of gradient descent learn-
ing is not what is going on in the brain’s actual networks. For one thing,
the comparison to a desired output would require that the biological brain
already contains correct synaptic configuration which it used to train itself.
In fact, there is a large degree of uncertainty as to “what features of the
brain’s microstructure are and are not functionally relevant. . . . Even so,
it is plain that the models are inaccurate in a variety of respects” (181). But
concerning their relevance to the brain as a parallel computational system,
“it is true that real nervous systems display, as their principal organizing
features, layers or populations of neurons that project their axons en masse
to some distinct layer or population of neurons, where each arriving axon
divides into multiple branches [which] make synaptic connections of vari-
ous weights onto many cells at the target location” (183). Yet a good model
of the causal dynamics of cognition requires only that it models the func-
tionally relevant features of these systems. Whatever is found to be the true
coding strategy (or strategies) of real networks in the brain, there is reason to
believe that a comprehension of learning will be a matter of understanding
a process of changing various patterns in the system toward a functionally
more effective representational “space.”
Conclusion
Cognitive science should seek to understand cognition through
the functioning of a computational system. Still, there are various ways
of modeling computation. The symbolic paradigm inspired by traditional
functionalism, where cognition is a series of operations over relationships
between attitudes toward various symbolically structured propositions, is
only one model of a computational system. However, there is reason to
doubt that the intensional psychology of PAs will provide a satisfactory
model for understanding the operations of human cognition. At most,
44 Jonathan Martin
this model will survive as a useful shorthand for the complex represen-
tational systems involved in neuro-computational cognition. As a way of
highlighting relevant perceptual or informational features of temporally ex-
tended and superficial neural activation patterns, the language of PAs will
serve an important social purpose. However, as cognitive science should
give us an account of the causal features of neural computation, the lan-
guage of folk psychology is too abstract to provide a satisfactory causal story.
This is not to say that no symbolic computational system could instantiate
cognitive processes (this is manifestly not the case), but merely that both
PAs and folk psychology are unsatisfactory as computational theories; how
such an architecture achieved cognitive tasks would still require a causal
story at a lower level of description. I will allow that propositional atti-
tudes serve the important function of helping us to see broad similarities
between different computational systems. We can say that a robot is look-
ing at a chessboard without commitment to any account of how this is
achieved, and folk psychology allows us to notice that his human opponent
is also engaged in a similar activity. As far as computational accounts of cog-
nition are concerned, though, the ontology of PAs and folk psychology are
terribly insufficient. Given this consideration, the explanation of cognitive
tasks ought to be supported by a computational study of neurobiology. The
result would be a computational account of cognition which would be con-
tinuous with research in neurology and would benefit from the lessons of
functionalism (content is still causally determined) while taking the causal
talk of folk psychology much less literally.
Works Cited
Churchland, Paul M. A Neurocomputational Perspective: the Nature of Mind
and the Structure of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.
———. The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul: a Philosophical Journey Into the
Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
———. “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes.” Philosophy
of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Ed. David J. Chalmers.
New York: Oxford UP, 2002. 568–80.
Clark, Andy. Associative Engines: Connectionism, Concepts, and Representational
Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.
———. Mindware: an Introduction to the Philosophy of Cognitive Science. New
York: Oxford UP, 2001.
Fodor, Jerry A. The Language of Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP,
1975.