AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
Emotional Problems of Evolutionary Psychology
JONATHAN MATHYS
EXPLANATIONSof human morality and behavior based upon the find-
ings of evolutionary psychology have had a certain vogue of late.
Books promoting evolutionary explanations of human nature by sci-
entists such as E. O. Wilson and Richard Dawkins as well as popularizers
like Robert Wright and Matt Ridley have become bestsellers. In one sense,
this is nothing new. In another, it is profoundly so, for authors such as
Wilson, Dawkins, and Wright have proclaimed that the time is ripe to
place the very foundations of the human sciences on solidly biological
grounds. Sociology, political science, ethics, and anthropology are all to
receive the obligatory prefix ‘evolutionary’ in the new dispensation.1I will
refer to the thesis that the human sciences ought to founded entirely on
the neo-Darwinian synthesis favored by such writers as Wilson and
Dawkins as ‘ultra-Darwinism’. The ‘ultra’ here is merited, for this is a
move disputed even within the various fields of biology and zoology that
Dawkins and Wilson call home. Other noted evolutionary theorists, such
as Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin, consider this extension of
Darwinism into the realm of the human sciences to be illegitimate, and in
fact based on poor science. In this paper, I will endeavor to show that in
one realm at least, that of the understanding of human emotion, these
theories are quite mistaken. It will be shown that their (mis)understand-
ing of human emotions is based upon an inadequate grasp of the rela-
1 Hereafter evolutionary psychology will be referred to as ‘evo-psych’, for short. Similarly, evolu-
Jonathan Mathys studies philosophy at DePaul University.
JONATHANMATHYS
tionship between emotion and human language.
I
My discussion will depend upon two points. The first is an account
of the role of emotions in human life and their relation to language that is
incompatible with an objectivist model of the world grounded in a repre-
sentational, consciousness-based epistemology. Such an epistemology is
precisely that which informs much of the background in the writings of
socio-biologists and evo-psychologists. It is the picture of the disengaged,
rational subject that is implicit in the beliefs of most scientists about sci-
entific practice that underwrites this objectivist stance towards the emo-
tions.
The second point is the observation that in their writings, Dawkins,
Wright, and company generally rely upon instrumental views of language,
in which words are merely tools for the organization of experience and
communication. Communication, in its turn, is seen as a form of causal
interaction, and usually winds up being a form of manipulation. This
raises problems about “translating” the results of evo-psych and socio-biol-
ogy out of what Dawkins calls the gene language and into ordinary lan-
guage. Charles Taylor would call this the transition between the language
of explanation, in our theorizing, and the language of deliberation, in
which we conduct our lives.2 That this is at all a problem is not seen by
ultra-Darwinians because of the first point; that is, the epistemology that
underlies their views. First, I will sketch out the instrumental view of lan-
guage and its understanding of the world, and then I will show how a
proper understanding of human emotions and their relation to language,
reveals the inadequacy of the instrumental view. Following this I will show
in some detail that the results of this mean trouble for ultra-Darwinian
views.
On an instrumentalist reading of language, words (for old-
fashioned British empiricists) or sentences/propositions/statements (for
Austrian-inspired logical positivists), are signs for or descriptions of either
natural objects or mental objects. As such, the adequacy of their correla-
tion with or rendering of their objects is an empirical matter, and can be,
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
in a useful way, verified by experimental methods. For my purposes, natu-
ral objects can mean events, phenomena, things—anything generally taken
to exist “outside” of the mind of a conscious subject. Mental objects are
obviously anything that exists “inside” such a mind as an object of reflec-
tion.3
Instrumental theories of language may be seen as a subset of a wider
family of views that may be called designative. According to these theories,
the fundamental activity of language is designation, or labelling objects in
the world with names, like slapping that “Marge’s china” or “Joe’s clothes”
sticker on a cardboard box before moving. According to this, “We give the
meaning of a sign or a word by pointing to the things or relations that they
can be used to refer to or talk about.”4For the instrumentalist, language is
a tool for the use of its users, whether for communication, entertainment,
manipulation of people and environments, or increased capacity for cog-
nition and reflection. Following this metaphor, it is something that can be
reshaped more or less at will, and redesigned for the purposes at hand.
If language serves primarily as a tool used for designating objects and
marking relations between those objects, over time words or expressions
may arise that are unnecessary or entirely mistaken in terms of the rela-
tions and objects they mark out in the world. We may make words and
invent relations that have no corresponding objects. If we assume that lan-
guage is primarily designative, we may also unwittingly assume that where
there is a word, there is an object. On this view, the figurative power of lan-
guage is easily employed in the creation of illusions, and apt to lead men
astray in their thinking, rather than provide access to otherwise hidden
facets of reality. Looked at like this, language is seductive in the way that
beauty or political power are seductive. It promises a great deal for very lit-
tle effort, and cashes in on the manipulative power of fantasy. Hence
Locke’s remarkable denunciation of rhetoric and figures of speech in his
Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in which he uses a figure of speech
(a “prevailing beauty” of “the fair sex”) to deride the use of figures of
speech (“eloquence”):
If we would speak of things as they are, we must allow that all the
tionary psychologist will become ‘evo-psychologist’, etc.
JONATHANMATHYS
art of rhetoric, besides order and clearness, all the artificial and fig-
urative application of words eloquence hath invented, are for noth-
ing else but to insinuate wrong ideas, move the passions, and thereby
mislead the judgment, and so indeed are perfect cheats.…
Eloquence, like the fair sex, has too prevailing beauties in it to suffer
itself ever to be spoken against. And it is in vain to find fault with
those arts of deceiving wherein men find pleasure to be deceived.5
As Paul de Man somewhat wickedly notes, “nothing could be more
eloquent than this denunciation of eloquence.”6 Locke is attacking at
least two different things in this passage: metaphor, “artificial and figu-
rative application of words,” and rhetoric, (the use of figuration “to insin-
uate wrong ideas, move the passions, and thereby mislead the
judgment”). While the main force of his assault seems to be clearly
directed against rhetoric, or “eloquence,” it is also clear that the poten-
tial danger of “eloquence” depends upon the infinite capacity of lan-
guage to generate new figures, new sentences, new ways of speaking. The
very existence of language is an invitation to violate Ockham’s prescrip-
tion against the needless multiplication of “entities” (names, kennings,
metaphors, things). What motivates such strongly felt condemnation of
what other philosophers have called appreciatively “the gift of
metaphor”?7In part, it is likely motivated by the fear of losing control, of
being dominated unknowingly by something we see as being in our serv-
ice.8
Being controlled by what should be an instrument is a degrading con-
dition. There is thus an ethical force to the injunctions of instrumentalists
2 Taylor, Sources 57–60.
3 The generic name for mental objects in the empiricist tradition, beginning with Locke, is ‘idea’.
4 Taylor, “Language” 218.
5 Bk. 3, ch. 10.
6 De Man 15. De Man’s article is fascinating and thought-provoking, and I am indebted to it for
pointing out this delightful passage from Locke. However, I think that here, as elsewhere, de Man
overstates his case (perhaps more rhetorically than philosophically?).
7 See Arendt 76.
8 As Taylor points out, “Language for the theory of these centuries is an instrument of control in
the assemblage of ideas which is thought or mental discourse,” and if we cannot be sure of a trans-
parent relationship between word and thing, “where we think we are assembling our ideas to match
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
not to let oneself be duped or misled by language into a distorted view of a
language-independent reality. In addition, instrumentalists may feel that
taking language too seriously as anything but a tool also leads to delu-
sions about reality that have disastrous practical and moral conse-
quences. Hence we find Dawkins claiming, “Human suffering has been
caused because too many of us cannot grasp that words are only tools for
our use.”9
The instrumentalist view suits an attempt at giving an objective
description of the world, and it depends upon the independence of
objects from ourselves, and the independence of our language from both
those objects and ourselves. On the instrumental view, we may manipu-
late and transform our language without altering anything essential about
ourselves or about our world. An auto mechanic minus his wrench is still
the same mechanic. A human without his customary language is still the
same human.
II
This view runs aground when dealing with phenomena that bear
unavoidably non-objective properties, unless it simply assumes that all
phenomena, period, are really constituted by properties readily charac-
terized as objective. Emotions are such non-objective phenomena, and
they bear subject-referring properties. They are expressive phenomena,
and pose seemingly insuperable problems for an attempt to find objec-
tive, instrumental designations for them. My understanding in this area
stems directly from Charles Taylor’s work, and for reasons of space I will
here simply present five claims that characterize what can be called an
expressivist framework as opposed to the designativist-
instrumentalist view:
A. Some of our emotions involve import-ascriptions.
B. Some of these imports are subject-referring.
C. Our subject-referring feelings are the basis of our understanding
of what it is to be human.
JONATHANMATHYS
D. These feelings are constituted by the articulations we come to
accept of them.
E. These articulations, which we can think of as interpretations,
require language.10
To say that some of our emotions involve import-ascriptions is to say
that they attribute meaning in a situation. They reveal a facet of that situa-
tion that would otherwise be unaccessible, say, that it is frightening. Yet
the emotion of fright also bears within itself a reference to a subject for
which the situation has the meaning of being frightful. To describe a situ-
ation as frightful is to describe oneself as being afraid, if one is or were to
be in that situation.
A consequence of this is that situation-description in feeling-
language is also self-description. That the denial of this statement leads to
absurdities is shown by considering the following example. Imagine a
man who tells you of being assaulted by a group of robbers while walking
in the forest at night with his friends. He says to you, “It was a terrifying
situation, but I wasn’t frightened at all.” This statement would be met
with incredulity, or would beg elaboration. Either the man means that
most people would find such a situation terrifying, though he does not, or
that he realizes in hindsight that he normally would have, or even should
have, felt terror at the situation, though he didn’t for some unusual rea-
son. To describe a situation as terrifying is not simply to state that it made
one feel terrified, but that it is a situation that normally gives rise to feel-
ings of terror in normally constituted human beings. Someone who said,
“I was lying around on my couch today, reading the cartoons,” and then
added, “I was absolutely terrified,” would prompt the inquiry, “Why?”
Such a feeling, completely inappropriate or disproportionate to its situa-
tion, would seem irrational, and if it were a frequent occurrence would
rightly be seen as pathological evidence of a psychological disorder.
Evo-psychologists, and most ultra-Darwinians, however, hold that
emotions must be objective, physical objects like any other if they are to be
susceptible to a scientific, Darwinian explanation. Our word ‘fear’ must
the real, we will in fact be building castles of illusion, or composing absurdities.” Most significant-
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
just be a label applied to some physiological phenomenon, perhaps a
whole spectrum of physiological phenomena that have some common ele-
ment, e.g., the dispersal of high levels of a certain chemical or hormone
throughout the brain or nervous system. The physical sensation F, that we
designate with the word ‘fear’, is in principle independent of the lan-
guage we use to describe it or understand it. Fwould be the same for any
human being in any culture, regardless of the language he might use to
articulate the experience of F. Thus, possessing an ultra-Darwinian under-
standing of Fshould not in any essential way transform the experience of
F. It should not matter whether one calls F‘fear’ or ‘temor’ or ‘crainte’ or
‘Furcht’ or understands it as ‘a sense of threat’ or ‘symptom of anxiety
disorder’ or ‘high relative presence of F-inducing chemical in the brain.’
Yet the testimony of the evo-psychologists themselves seems to con-
trovert this, for they clearly realize, when speaking in non-theoretical con-
texts, that changes of interpretation involve changes of significance, and
that some phenomena are constituted by our interpretations of their sig-
nificance. Wright, for instance, tells us of the neo-Darwinian paradigm
that “once truly grasped it can entirely alter one’s perception of social
reality.”11Clearly, if this is true about something as nebulous and broad as
one’s perception of social reality, it is even truer about something vastly
more focused, concrete, and situated, like specific emotions.
But doesn’t altering one’s perception of an emotion in a significant
way alter the emotion itself? The success of psychotherapy, the power of
religious conversion, the efficacy of meditative training, among other
things, all depend upon this fact. Altering understanding of experiences,
reinterpreting them, and thus transforming the emotions associated with
them involves language that is quite rightly and precisely called “figura-
tive.” This language figures, sculpts, shapes, gives body to, as it were,
human experience. I was not surprised to find Wright claiming,
“Metaphors help us come to moral terms with Darwin.”12Dawkins, how-
ever, is blithely unaware of this power of language. In a remarkably unself-
aware passage he writes, “for brevity, we shall again use the convention of
thinking of the individual as though it had a conscious purpose. As
before, we shall hold in the back of our mind that this is just a figure of
JONATHANMATHYS
speech. A body is really a machine blindly programmed by its selfish
genes.”13 This passage only makes sense if Dawkins is allowed to legislate
what counts as figurative language by personal fiat. On the instrumentalist
view this is precisely what is allowed.14 However, without an instrumen-
talist understanding, what is remarkable about the passage is that
Dawkins merely substitutes one figure of speech for another, e.g., “indi-
vidual is ‘blind machine’” for “individual is ‘conscious purpose’.” This
makes a world of difference, and I mean that quite literally.
III
If the expressivist account of emotions is true, sociobiology and evo-
psych share a peculiar characteristic: if they become widely accepted, their
objects of inquiry will vanish. This is a dramatic way of saying that the the-
ories in question, if accepted, would alter the very objects they are trying
to explain, and that since this alteration is not provided for by the the-
ory, the original targets of the explanation would no longer be avail-
able, leaving the theory in a strange predicament. Indignation, shame,
trepidation, bemusedness, or any other of the subtle situation-revealing,
quintessentially human emotions, along with the subject-referring prop-
erties that correspond to them, would be subject to a thorough-going and
ly, “Our instruments will have taken over, and instead of controlling we shall be controlled”
(Taylor, “Language” 226). This would be humiliating and unworthy of the dignity of a rational
being capable of achieving, with the proper stance, objectivity and independence.
9 Dawkins 18.
10 For a fuller exposition and defense of these claims the reader may refer to Taylor’s own writings,
especially to his article “Self-Interpreting Animals,” from which these five claims are taken.
11 Wright 4.
12 Wright 26. Examples include “mental organs,” “an arms race of love” (Wright 26), a child as
“precious” gene machine (36), and “We’re all puppets” (37). Nevertheless, Wright admits that
“the question may be whether, after the new Darwinism takes root, the word ‘moral’ can be any-
thing but a joke” (326). Isn’t this too, though, another splendid metaphor? What is moral is,
metaphorically, a joke. I do indeed find this an amusing metaphor. Incidentally, if morality were
indeed a joke (and what a marvellous joke!) neo-Darwinism would still not help us come to terms
with it.
13 Dawkins 142.
14 The simplest standard for whether or not a given expression is figurative is the current state of
ordinary language, not science. Though I don’t have the space to argue this at length, I will give
two examples. The hard-nosed scientist wants to claim that “the sun rises in the east” is figurative
because it doesn’t match current scientific theory, which presumably attains knowledge of objec-
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
radical reinterpretation along neo-Darwinian lines. A new understanding
of these emotions, especially such a radically out-of-the-ordinary type of
understanding—one might say, undermining—as the neo-Darwinian is,
would transform our experience of them. Thus, the emotions that evo-
psych purports to explain would be dramatically modified if an evo-psych
perspective was accepted by a given agent. That agent would no longer be
subject to the same emotions; i.e., the emotions that she experienced
before learning about their evo-psych explanation. Indeed, how could
worry about one’s adopted child, or one’s siblings remain the same after
discovering that this emotion generally functions according to genetic hard-
wiring, to use a metaphor often employed by evo-psych theorists that is
drawn from computer science? Wouldn’t it be transformed to “worry,” an
epiphenomenon of certain physiological processes controlled by one’s
genotype and its interaction with its environment? The experience of
“worry” would be qualitatively different than the evo-psych-innocent expe-
rience of worry.
Evo-psychologists are here changing the subject. They aren’t talking
about what we ordinarily mean by emotions. Instead, they are talking about
some physical phenomenon on which we slap the linguistic label ‘emo-
tions’, whereas in the language we use in life, the very way we describe and
interpret an emotion is part of that emotion’s constitution. This is part of
the experience of searching for just the right way to say what we are feeling.
We often don’t understand this until we figure out a way to say it, an ade-
quate way of wording it, of embodying it more fully in language. This is also
why others can genuinely help us to understand our own emotions, some-
thing impossible to make sense of on the usual, consciousness-based, rep-
resentational epistemologies centered around the isolated, reflective
individual.
Robert Wright, the only psychologist among the authors considered
here, shows a deeper awareness of the fuzziness and difficulty involved in
dealing with the human psyche (although he does, on the whole, believe
that evo-psych can successfully dispel the fuzz). Wright notes that evo-psych
focuses, “not on the emotion itself, but on the evolutionary logic it
embodies.”15 In doing this, evo-psych finds that emotions like parental
love, hatred of outsiders, and concern for siblings are in fact “transmuta-
tions” of cost-benefit or game-theoretical analysis into feelings.16 It con-
cludes that “feelings…were designed as logic executors.”17 Thus, in “the
JONATHANMATHYS
war of the sexes,” feelings such as indignation and outrage are in fact
weapons in a struggle to maximize the survival of genetic information car-
ried in the sex cells (sperm and eggs) of men and women. Wright rightly
notes, “Once you start seeing everyday feelings and thoughts as genetic
weapons, marital spats take on new meaning.”18 What Wright and other
evolutionary psychologists are proposing in such re-descriptions of “every-
day feelings” is precisely a transformative reinterpretation of them. That
they are in fact transformed is evinced by Wright’s acknowledgment of the
new meaning he sees in marital spats. Let us get even more concrete.
IV
Wright gives the example of a man who, during his honeymoon,
informed his bride that he didn’t want an “old-fashioned wife” (meaning a
prudish, non-sexually assertive one) but now some years later wonders
loudly whether she couldn’t cook once in a while (now that the value of
sexual assertiveness has worn off, perhaps because two kids have been born
and she’s going through menopause). Evolutionary psychologists suggest
that the emotions that are cued by such changes in the situation of a rela-
tionship are susceptible to an evolutionary explanation. The feelings are
rough and ready responses that, on this account, lead to actions or behav-
ior-patterns that have been selected because in the environment of evolu-
tionary adaptation—our distant past—they have led to increased
transmission of the agent’s genes to the next generation. In the lingo, they
have been “selected for.”
Let us examine two possible explanations of the husband’s anger.
We’ll call him Joe. The first explanation: Perhaps after many years of sex-
tive fact. The shock-jock poet speaks of the beginning of a river as its “salivating orifice.” The aver-
age person would feel that the poet had sinned against ordinary language by not speaking of the
river’s “mouth,” whereas the scientist had sinned against common knowledge about the sun.
This feeling would remain even if the scientist calmly explained modern astronomy to the aver-
age person. Nor would the scientist stop saying that the sun rises in the east when speaking in
everyday contexts. The poet, however, would have a rough time of it if he insisted on inventing
offensive but literal equivalents to dead metaphors in ordinary, non-poetical contexts.
15 Wright 59.
16 For instance, during a discussion of the evolution of monogamy, Wright writes: “As the human
brain got bigger, it probably depended more on early cultural programming. Children with two
parents may have had an educational edge over children with only one. Characteristically, natu-
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
ually fulfilling marriage, and after the birth of two kids and the burden
of the added responsibilities that child-raising involves, Joe starts to see
that some of the traits of the “old-fashioned wife” stereotype that he
scorned in youth are quite valuable. His wife, Liz, however, has always
resisted doing any cooking, firstly, because she never learned how, and
secondly, because she associates it with the oppression of women and
sees it as beneath her dignity as a liberated woman. While he appreciates
his wife’s lack of sexual submissiveness, it is getting difficult for him to
do all the cooking for the entire family. While Joe made sacrifices in
seeking an assertive, self-respecting, but adventurous wife, he would like
it if Liz made some concessions to the hated housewife ideal, however
small. He is emotionally and physically fatigued. The second explana-
tion: Clearly a wife who desires a great deal of sex is genetically valuable,
as she is more likely to bear a great number of children who will carry
Joe’s genes. However, now that two children have been born and her
reproductive potential is rapidly dwindling, Joe’s “feelings” have started
to shift in regards to Liz’s ample sex drive vis-a-vis her meager cooking
drive.19 In his new middle-age environment, Liz’s meager cooking drive
looks, or rather feels, to Joe like much more of a genetic liability. This
manifests itself in his frustration and anger about her not cooking, per-
haps also in a corresponding decrease of sexual desire for her. The under-
lying (genetic) threat, as Wright reads it, is that if Liz doesn’t help out
more with the cooking—make her behavior more adaptive—Joe will go
hunting for a fitter caretaker for his children, or just leave.20
So we have an explanation of Joe’s anger employing “everyday” lan-
guage; that is, we tell a story about emotions and why we have them. This
is called by some, perhaps condescendingly, “folk psychology.” It is clear
that in this case explanation and interpretation are more or less the same
process. In the second case, though, things are different. We have an expla-
ral selection appears to have taken this cost-benefit calculus and transmuted it into a feeling—in
particular, the sensation of love” (59). We may ask here, is love identical to “the sensation of
love”? On a naturalistic outlook, it would be difficult to answer in the negative. Perhaps love is
the sensation of love plus a group of actions recognized as conferring greater probability of sur-
vival on the beloved? This might be an “elegant” naturalist/behaviorist formula.
17 Wright 190.
18 Wright 89.
19 Of course, there is no cooking drive, but this is the type of shorthand that Dawkins, Wilson,
JONATHANMATHYS
nation of Joe’s anger, or rather, his “anger,” as an emotional mechanism for
the execution of an evolutionary adaptation. The adaptation is a “men-
tal organ” that detects situations in which the sex-drive to cooking-drive
ratio is out of whack and is a genetic liability. It copes with this exigency
by sending out an emotion, “anger,” to motivateits host organism, Joe, to
either modify the situation, or get out. But are these the same object? Are
they the same emotion when removed from these two very different theo-
retical narratives? Is the expressivist feeling, anger-that-your-wife-won’t-
cook-because-you-realize-now-that-sex-isn’t-everything, the same as the
evo-psychological logic executor, anger-that-your-wife-won’t-cook-because-
she’s-post-menopausal-and-thus-more-genetically-valuable-if-she-feeds-you-
and-your-children-than-as-an-object-of-desire? At this point, I hope that the
reader would readily answer this in the negative.
By way of summing up, remember Dawkins’s metaphor: He tells
us that some image is just a metaphorical way of putting things in (con-
ventional, subjective) “human language” and then gives us a metaphor
to tell us how things really are, i.e., in the (objective) “gene language”;
for instance, “Bodies are really just survival machines for their genes.”
The idea that a body is a survival machine for genes is certainly
metaphorical as the language currently stands. It may in time become a
dead metaphor; that is, one which has a more or less literal function
and meaning, as when we speak of the mouth of a river, or the face of a
mountain. As it is now, however, Dawkins’s metaphor is a proposed
transition away from ordinary language: it is a transformative reinter-
pretation of our experience and its embodiment in our language, and a
grand one at that. It must stand or fall as such a proposed transition.
And so must ultra-Darwinist articulations of our emotional life.
Wright, et al., use as a convention of simplicity. Wilson and Wright and their ilk generally view
emotions, passions, desires, the entire constellation of affective phenomena, as the mediators
between genes and behavior. So women might be expected to have an instinct (notoriously) for
nurturing their children. In many environments this will manifest itself in various ways: tending
to wounds, making clothes for them, etc. Cooking for them might be one of these manifestations.
Women will be motivated by various emotions—concern, love, warmth, worry, consternation—and
these emotions will be essentially the ways the genes direct behavior in the proper survival-rele-
vant directions.
20 Wright 89. In many cases it makes perfect evolutionary sense for a husband to abandon his
children to his wife, especially if she is beginning menopause. The wife will then have no chance
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
of reproducing again. Her genetic fate is thus tied up with the children. The husband, however,
can just have more children, perhaps with younger, more fertile women. The wife will be highly
motivated to take of his previous children anyway, so, genetically speaking, why not? But why is
this not generally the case when women reach menopause? This is another reason why many have
questioned the essentially Malthusian premise that all living organisms strive to reproduce as
much as possible. This is quite flatly untrue in human societies, and it is certainly untrue in
regards to the “fittest,” “strongest,” or what have you. Rich, affluent societies almost always have
relatively modest, if not positively maladaptive, reproductive rates. Why aren’t the most “success-
ful” humans breeding more?
JONATHANMATHYS
EVOLUTIONARYPSYCHOLOGY
References
Arendt, Hannah. The Life of the Mind. Vol. 1. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1978.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: University Press, 1989.
De Man, Paul. “The Epistemology of Metaphor.” Critical Inquiry5 (1978):
13–50.
Taylor, Charles. “Language and Human Nature.” Human Agency and
Language: Philosophical Papers I. Cambridge: University Press, 1985.
———. Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1989.
Wright, Robert. The Moral Animal: Why We Are the Way We Are. New York:
Vintage Books, 1994.