Aporia vol. 21 no. 1—2011
A Semantic Explanation of Harmony
in Kant’s Aesthetics
Shae McPhee
Immanuel Kant, the author of the “Copernican revolution in philoso-
phy,” won renown for being a pioneer in the epistemic overthrow of
the previous ontological epoch. Kant’s studies of various philosophical
subjects eventually led him to an analysis of judgment and the beautiful
(Ginsborg). Kant’s epistemic analysis of the beautiful, however, led him
to an uncomfortable paradox: “How is a judgment possible which, merely
from one’s own feeling of pleasure in an object, independent of its concept,
judges this pleasure, as attached to the representation of the same object
in every other subject, and does so a priori, i.e., without having to wait for
the assent of others?” (Judgment 168). Kant’s explanation of the paradox is
that pleasure in the beautiful depends on the harmony and free play of the
faculties of Imagination and Understanding. For various reasons, many
scholars have attacked what they believe to be flaws in Kant’s explanation.
I believe that the main source of the apparent flaws lies in Kant’s use of
the term “harmony” to explicate an epistemic principle. Kant uses the term
“harmony” in such a way that it ruptures his epistemic model of judgments
of taste. When Kant’s premises and his use of the term “harmony” are
translated into a semantic model of judgments of taste, however, the appar-
ent discrepancies and flaws within Kant’s reasoning are resolved.
Shae McPhee is a senior at Brigham Young University majoring in both English and
philosophy. He is very interested in logic and works as a teaching assistant for classes
on deductive and predicate logic. He plans to attend law school after graduation
and hopes to clerk for a judge. This essay tied for third place in the 2011 David H.
Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
52 Shae McPhee
To begin, I will explain exactly what I mean by epistemic systems and
principles as opposed to semantic systems and principles. Walter Watson
describes different philosophical “epochs” in the Architectonics of Meaning.
Watson says of the current philosophical epoch, “at the present time we
tend to view philosophy as what philosophers have written. This primacy of
the text is characteristic not only of philosophy today, but of all disciplines”
(5, italics added). Thus Watson says we are living in a semantic age that is
“concerned with the expression of what we know about that which is, or
meaning” (5). However, Watson asserts that philosophy has not always
been so semantically oriented: “The history of philosophy exhibits a cycle
of epochal shifts: from an ontic epoch concerned with that which is, or
being, to an epistemic epoch concerned with how we know that which is,
or knowing, to a semantic epoch . . . and back again to an ontic epoch con-
cerned with being” (5). Watson believes that Kant’s work was the impetus
for a shift from an ontological epoch to an epistemic epoch: “Kant, in the
preface to the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, proposes to
make metaphysics scientific . . . by supposing not that our knowledge must
conform to objects, but that objects must conform to our knowledge” (7).
While I agree with Watson that Kant’s work precipitated an epistemic ep-
och, I believe that in some cases Kant’s insights transcend epistemology
and work better in a semantic system. Kant’s use of the term “harmony”
is one such insight, and my goal is to show that the term fits better in a
semantic system.
I will now delve into the actual mechanics of judgments of cognition
and judgments of taste. By comparing and contrasting the two judgments, I
will facilitate both an explication of scholars’ arguments against the general
relation of the two judgments and the translation of Kant’s model into a se-
mantic system. In the Critique of Pure Reason Kant says judgments of cogni-
tion are made when the Understanding applies concepts to “the synthesis
of the manifold of intuition” generated by the Imagination (465). In other
words, the Imagination synthesizes objects encountered in the blooming,
buzzing confusion into distinct presentations. These presentations are then
referred to the Understanding. The Understanding synthesizes the presen-
tation according to concepts gained through experience. The end result is
an experience or judgment of cognition. The process of making judgments
of taste is somewhat different: after the Imagination has synthesized the
manifold of intuition into a presentation and referred it to the faculty of
Understanding, the Understanding does not synthesize the presentation
according to concepts as a basis for cognition; rather, the two faculties of
Imagination and Understanding stand in a relation of harmony or free play
that results in feelings of pleasure.1
1 Much of my introduction closely follows Ginsborg and the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. At this
point I am merely outlining the widely known problems generally associated with Kant’s aesthetics.
harMony in Kant’S aeStheticS 53
Kant’s reasoning has become notorious among scholars because the
explanation seems to create paradoxes of its own. Scholars such as Meer-
bote, Allison, and Guyer argue that the free play of the faculties must nec-
essarily be inherent in all cognitive perceptual experiences or in none of
them (Ginsborg). Should free play of the faculties be inherent in all cogni-
tive experience, then everything should be beautiful; if it is inherent in no
cognitive experience, then nothing could be beautiful (Ginsborg). Schol-
ars also puzzle over other questions: why does harmony of the faculties
result in sensations of pleasure; what is the ugly? Some scholars have tried
to dismiss Kant’s paradoxical explanation altogether by claiming that the
philosopher’s explication of the judgment of taste and beauty relates only
to aesthetic feelings, and therefore has nothing to do with cognition. The
Kantian scholar Rudolf Makkreel refutes this, however, when he says that
“the judgment of taste is not directly cognitive, but nevertheless relates to
‘cognition in general’” (52). The question of how the judgments are related
will become paramount in my translation of the epistemic system into a
semantic system.
Kant’s claim that these two judgments are generally related bothers
many scholars. Henry Allison declares Kant’s explication of the two judg-
ments to be worthless because:
It proves too much . . . for if, as Kant suggests, the har-
mony of the faculties constitutes a necessary subjective
condition of cognition, which must therefore occur in
all cognition, and if the ability to occasion such a har-
mony is a sufficient condition for judging an object beau-
tiful, then it would seem that every object of possible
experience must be judged beautiful, simply in virtue of
conforming to this condition. (184)
When grounded in an epistemic system, Allison’s critique of Kant’s reason-
ing could be valid. Kant’s system does not allow for a difference between
conceptual relations and aesthetic relations of the faculties. A semantic sys-
tem, as we will see later, makes possible both a conceptual and aesthetic re-
lation of the faculties, and thus dissolves Allison’s apparent paradox. In Re-
flection on Beauty, Ralf Meerbote also doubts Kant’s view of the judgments
of cognition and taste because he feels that the two judgments are basically
one and the same. He says they both have “a necessary hermeneutic com-
ponent; in other words, . . . there may be no case of cognition which is
completely analysable” (qtd. in Morstein 149). Both Allison and Meerbote
argue that there is no inherent difference between the judgments. Another
scholar, Rudolf Makkreel, could not disagree more. In Imagination and In-
terpretation in Kant, Makkreel argues that the two judgments do indeed
54 Shae McPhee
differ. I feel that his case ultimately fails, but it does reveal what I believe
to be the most fundamental flaw in Kant’s argument. I think this flaw is
essentially the main—although subtle—source of other scholars’ concerns
regarding Kant’s reasoning.
Makkreel argues that the significant difference between the two judg-
ments lies in synthesis. When a person makes a judgment of cognition, a
presentation referred by the Imagination is synthesized by the Understand-
ing according to concepts. Makkreel notes, however,
that in his discussion of taste Kant is speaking of an ap-
prehension without concepts, not a synthesis without
concepts. His text supplies no direct evidence for equat-
ing the aesthetic apprehension of imagination with the
syntheses of apprehension and reproduction, for there is
no mention of synthesis in his account of aesthetic ap-
prehension without a concept. (50)
Makkreel’s observation that Kant never used the term “synthesis” when
discussing the judgment of taste is very important. In judgments of cogni-
tion, concepts guide the synthesis of the presentation of the Imagination to
produce objects. No synthesis in the judgment of taste means that when the
Imagination refers a presentation to the Understanding, the Understand-
ing “apprehends” the presentation, but does not synthesize it according to
concepts to produce an object. Instead, the two faculties of Imagination
and Understanding stand in a harmonious relation that results in pleasure.
This is a good attempt on Makkreel’s part to explain the difference between
the two judgments, but there is a problem. How can two faculties stand in
a harmonious relation to one another? What are faculties? And where do
faculties stand in terms of time and space?
A brief discussion of Kant’s use of the term “harmony” will reveal the
significance of these questions. I believe that Kant used the term “harmo-
ny” (harmonie) in the same sense in which we apply the word to music. Kant
said of the harmonization of the faculties, “It involves merely the relation
of the representational powers to each other, so far as they are determined
by a representation” (qtd. in Allison 125). For there to be harmony in mu-
sic, two notes must stand in a particular chronological and spatial relation.
I will use the musical notes C and E to illustrate the point. A chronological
relation between the two notes is necessary for harmony. Harmony will
never be achieved if a person merely plucks the note C in succession to
the unsustained note E. Even if a pianist plays the notes in rapid succes-
sion one after the other again and again, harmony is still impossible. The
more subtle spatial relation between the notes is equally important for the
creation of harmony. Musicians call the spatial relation between the notes
harMony in Kant’S aeStheticS 55
C and E a major third. When played simultaneously, the spatial relation
(the distance between the wavelengths of sound) of the two notes creates
a harmony. Thus, space and time are indispensable in the production of
musical harmony.
Perhaps one might object that the term “harmony” can also be used
in a metaphorical sense as well as a musical sense. For example, different
branches of the United States government (at least theoretically) can be
said to “work harmoniously together” to further the interests of its citi-
zens. But I argue that even this sense of the word “harmony” necessarily
depends on spatial and chronological relations—at least abstractly. Without
space, entities like governments couldn’t exist. Another possible objection
to my claim that Kant uses the term “harmony” here in the musical sense
is that perhaps harmony is not required of judgments of taste because Kant
claimed the faculties stand in a relation of harmony or free play. If the
terms are synonymous then harmony could just as well be called free play.
But the terms are not synonymous. Henry Allison tells us that the terms
“harmony” and “free play” are not the same and that the disjunction “har-
mony or free play” is inclusive. Allison says:
Just as there can be a free play without harmony, so there
can also be a harmony without free play. This occurs in
ordinary cognitive judgments, but particularly in judg-
ments of perfection. For in the latter case, the harmony
is based on a determinate concept of the object (of what
sort of thing it is supposed to be), which leaves no scope
for the free activity of the imagination. (117)
So we are to understand harmony as being separate from free play. I believe
that Allison’s assessment of the term “harmony” is astute, and I will show
in my semantic construction of Kant’s judgment of the beautiful the impor-
tant distinction between the two terms.
In Kant’s epistemic system, thoughts are more basic than things or
language. For Kant, all things are appearances—including space and time.
When discussing aesthetics in the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant says, “All
the parts of space, even to infinity, are simultaneous . . . Space is nothing
other than merely the form of all appearances of outer sense” (175, 177).
When speaking of time Kant says, “It has only one dimension: different
times are not simultaneous, but successive (just as different spaces are not
successive, but simultaneous) . . . Only in time can both contradictorily
opposed determinations in one thing be encountered, namely succes-
sively” (Pure Reason 179–80). Considering my explication of the nature of
harmony, thinking of space and time themselves in such a manner creates
problems for Kant’s notion of the harmonization of the faculties. But if
56 Shae McPhee
we are to believe Kant when he says that space applies only to “appear-
ances of outer senses” and not to the inner faculties of Imagination and
Understanding, and if we are to further believe him that “different times
are not simultaneous, but successive,” then how can we believe that there
can possibly be a harmonization of the two faculties? The faculties cannot
stand in a spatial relation because space is applicable only to appearances
of outward senses. The faculties cannot stand in a chronological relation,
because different times are not simultaneous, but successive. Thus, there
is no easy way to explicate Kant’s metaphor of harmony in his epistemic
system. However, I hope that my semantic translation of his system will
provide a plausible context for the metaphor of harmony.
It is a synthesis of the Imagination guided by concepts of the Under-
standing that unites the two faculties and produces an object in judgments
of cognition. Except for Makkreel, scholars generally cannot explain the
synthesis that occurs in judgments of taste. Nakeeb describes this synthesis
of the faculties without concepts to be “a mystical paradox: beauty is that
which appears to conform to a law, where there is no law, and possesses
a kind of finality, where there is no ‘end’” (612). When Makkreel points
out that Kant’s writing does not give evidence of synthesis in the judg-
ment of taste, he severs the connection between the faculties. Admittedly,
the Understanding still apprehends the presentation given by the Imagina-
tion, but there is no unification; therefore, there can be no harmony. Two
people with an argument can apprehend one another’s point of view, but
if there is no unification or synthesis of their ideas, then there can be no
agreement or harmony. Thus, Makkreel’s observation accidentally makes
clear the difficulty of using the term “harmony” to describe an epistemic
principle—the unification of two faculties in judgments of taste.
If my hypothesis is true that Kant is mistakenly using the term “har-
mony” to explain an epistemic principle, then simply translating the epis-
temic system into a semantic system should dissolve any inherent paradoxes
or discrepancies in Kant’s reasoning. I will assume Noam Chomsky’s ideol-
ogy that the capacity for language in the mind is innate. This famous lin-
guist builds a base for my semantic model when he says, “There is nothing
incomprehensible in the view that stimulation provides the occasion for
the mind to apply certain innate interpretive principles, certain concepts
that proceed from ‘the power of understanding’ itself, from the faculty of
thinking rather than from external objects directly” (Chomsky). In explain-
ing the model I will stick to Chomsky’s ideas, but I will use the language
and definitions of Kant. Thus, when some object stimulates the mind, “in-
nate interpretive principles” are energized. Let us say that we meet a polar
bear on the phenomenal plane. Kant would say that our faculty of Imagina-
tion would “synthesize the manifold of intuition” and create a presentation
harMony in Kant’S aeStheticS 57
of the form of the polar bear. Using Chomsky’s model, I would say that
the Imagination (innate interpretive principles) synthesizes the manifold of
intuition and creates a linguistic presentation of the form of the polar bear;
that is, the bear is presented in symbols. The mind interprets the qualities
of the form of the bear. Should the bear have white fluffy fur, four legs, a
certain size, flat ears, and a round head, the mind would create the follow-
ing semiotic presentation: a(animal);M(mammal);Pb(polar bear);w(white);
fl(fluffy);lS(large size);rh(round head);fe(flat ears);etc.
Before I go further in my explication, I will explain how the Imagi-
nation is equipped to determine forms such as “polar bear” or “animal.”
Makkreel explains that “in the First Introduction, Kant speaks of ‘specifica-
tion’ . . . in relation to the imaginative presentation involved in reflective
judgment. This reflective process is not ‘mechanical’ . . . like application,
but proceeds ‘artistically, according to the universal but at the same time
indeterminate principle of a purposive, systematic ordering of nature’”
(56–57). Kant asserts that the faculty of Imagination has the capability of
apprehension (Auffassung). The apprehensive capability of the Imagination
gives it the power to make “systematic orderings of nature,” and so we see
that the Imagination is equipped to make systematic judgments of form.
This semantic presentation of the polar bear is then presented or
referred to the faculty of Understanding. The Understanding receives the
semantic presentation a;M;Pb;w;fl;lS;rh;fe;etc., and in cases of judgments
of cognition, it synthesizes the presentation with concepts gained from ex-
perience. By experiencing many polar bears (from Coca-Cola commercials,
trips to the zoo, the Discovery Channel, etc.), the Understanding will have
created a semantic presentation of what the form of a polar bear ought to
be: a;M;Pb;w;fl;lS;rh;Pe;etc. The Understanding’s linguistic presentation is
slightly different from the presentation referred by the Imagination in that
the ears are not flat, but pointy. Essentially, the Understanding says that the
ears ought to be pointy. The mind then releases a certain amount of energy
to guide the synthesis of the presentation of the Imagination (the linguistic
interpretation of the synthesis of the manifold of intuition) according to
what the polar bear ought to be (the linguistic presentation of the Un-
derstanding) in order to determine if the object encountered on the phe-
nomenal plane truly is a polar bear or not. The discrepancies between the
two presentations are resolved through concepts, and the end result is a
definite object: a polar bear.
Judgments of taste, though somewhat different from judgments of
cognition, are still, as Kant says, “generally related.” Let’s say that once
again we meet a polar bear on the plane of experience. The Imagination
will again present the semantic form of the object to the Understanding,
and the Understanding will apprehend the form. But this time, the form
58 Shae McPhee
referred by the Imagination matches up exactly with what the Understand-
ing determines the form of a polar bear ought to be. The result of the
referral is the following: a;M;Pb;w;fl;lS;rh;Pe;etc. is a;M;Pb;w;fl;lS;rh;Pe;etc.
The two statements together create a tautological relation, or the simple
conjoining of two equivalent statements. When the two faculties create
a tautological relation through apprehension, the result is still cognitive
because the mind recognizes the object. But this example transcends
a mere judgment of cognition because no concepts are used in making
the judgment; no concepts are necessary. Under normal conditions, the
mind must guide the synthesis of the Imagination with concepts to re-
move discrepancies between the form of what is being experienced and
what the form of the object being experienced ought to be. But because
in this case the form matches exactly with what the Understanding be-
lieves the form ought to be, the two faculties can harmonize through
mere apprehension, as Kant originally thought. The mind still releases
a certain amount of energy, presupposing a need to resolve discrepan-
cies between the two faculties, but because no discrepancies exist, the
excess energy is disbursed throughout the body as feelings of pleasure.
The harmony of the faculties occurs because semantic statements can
stand in relation to each other—they are inherently capable of harmony.
Two or more semantic statements can be related and conjoined. The term
“harmony” can function in a semantic system because semantic statements
fulfill the necessary chronological and spatial requirements of the term. It
might even be said that language is the expression of thought. This paper
is the physical presentation of my ideas. Without language, the thoughts
would remain both in my mind and unexpressed. My example makes use
of tautological relations, but statements can also be related truth function-
ally and in many other ways. In Kant’s model, the faculties themselves are
required to harmonize. For me, this is difficult to understand because the
faculties transcend time and space.
My semantic model clears up another problem that critics have had
with Kant’s harmonization: what is the ugly, and why do ugly objects give
us feelings of displeasure or pain? To answer these questions, I will return,
yet again, to my polar bear example. This time, however, suppose that
the bear is skinny with thin patches of gray hair. The form presented to the
Understanding by the Imagination will yield so many discrepancies that
the mind will have to use extra energy to make the cognition. The extra
expenditure of energy will result in feelings of displeasure and pain. The
bear is ugly; that is, the bear’s form is not a proper bear’s form, and so the
mind must work harder to identify it as a polar bear.
It must also be noted that the only objects capable of being consid-
ered beautiful are what Kant calls “objects of taste.” A chair, for example,
harMony in Kant’S aeStheticS 59
will never be considered beautiful by a normal person. Even if a chair has a
perfect form capable of creating a harmony between the semantic faculties
of Imagination and Understanding, it is not an object of taste. Paul Guyer
says of objects of taste, “It is easy to draw . . . a definition from Kant’s state-
ments: a judgment of taste is a judgment of an object grounded on a delight
in it which it is without any interest” (167, italics added). Only objects of
taste can stimulate the free play of the Imagination, which is essential for
judgments of the beautiful. Any object that is not an object of taste but
still creates harmony—according to my semantic model—will be, as Allison
suggests, a judgment of perfection and not a judgment of beauty. Normal
people will have cultivated their judgment of taste to the point of being
capable of making aesthetic judgments. People who are not normal will not
have experienced enough polar bears to know what the form of the polar
bear ought to be. Thus, the semantic faculty of Understanding is deficient,
and those persons will be unable to determine what is beautiful.
I believe that the problems many scholars have with Kant’s epistemic
explication of judgments of taste are largely due to his use of the term
“harmony.” Harmony necessarily depends on space and time for operation.
But Kant himself declared that the components of his model—faculties of
Imagination and Understanding—transcend space and time. Fundamental
problems with synthesis and the scope of the judgments are dissolved when
Kant’s assertions are translated into a semantic system. The fact that Kant’s
harmony of the faculties fit so well into a semantic system is, I believe,
compelling evidence supporting the conclusion that Kant’s use of the term
“harmony” is inappropriate. Thus, a simple but fundamental flaw has been
a major source of contention among scholars for many years.
Works Cited
Allison, Henry E. Kant’s Theory of Taste: A Reading of the Critique of
Aesthetic Judgment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP, 2001.
Chomsky, Noam. “Language and Mind. Noam Chomsky (1968).” Marxists
Internet Archive. N.p., n.d. Web. 15 June 2010.
Ginsborg, Hannah. “Kant’s Aesthetics and Teleology.” Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Stanford University, 9 Nov, 2005. Web. 15 June 2010.
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP,
1979.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W.
Wood. New York: Cambridge UP, 2009.
————. Critique of the Power of Judgment. Trans. Paul Guyer and Eric
Matthews. New York: Cambridge UP, 2000.
Makkreel, Rudolf. Imagination and Interpretation in Kant: The Hermeneutical
Import of the Critique of Judgment. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1990.
von Morstein, Petra. “Critical Notice.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 14.1
(1984): 147–52.
Nakeeb, Diana Gosselin. “Immanuel Kant.” Encyclopedia of Literary Critics
and Criticism. Ed. Chris Murray. London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999.
610–13.
Watson, Walter. The Architectonics of Meaning: Foundations of the New
Pluralism. Albany: State U of New York P, 1985.