Aporia, Vol. I, No. 1 (Fall 1991)
Art and the Saving Power in Late Heidegger
Robert Metcalf
In "The Question Concerning Technology," Heidegger allows the
extreme danger of technology to come to light: "the coming to
presence of technology threatens revealing, threatens it with the possi
bility that all revealing will be consumed in ordering and that everything
wiU present itself only in the unconcealedness of standing-reserve"
(1977,315). Yet according to Hoelderlin," where the danger is, grows
the saving power also." The saving power can be fostered only in a realm
which is, on the one hand, akin to the essence of technology and,o n the
other, fundamentally different from it. Such a realm is art. For technol
ogy and art essentially belong to techne as ways of revealing, ways of
bringing forth truth. Thus Heidegger concludes that art is the realm of
being which is primally claimed to foster the saving power in its
increase.
However,i n "The Word of Nietzsche:' God is Dead'," art essences
quite differently in relation to the danger of technology. In this essay
Heidegger shows how modem technology, the struggle for dominion
over the earth,i s imbued with the metaphysics ofs ubjectivity. Nietzsche
becomes significant to this discussion because the metaphysics of
subjectivity culminates in the "will to power"—^Nietzsche's most im
portant discovery. Heidegger announces that" the struggle fordominion
over the earth is in its historical essence already the result oft he fact that
whatever is as such is appearing in the mode oft he will to power without
yet being recognized or without being understood at all as that will"
(WN 1977, 101). Nietzsche's conception of the will to power is the
historical culmination oft he metaphysics ofs ubjectivity in that, whereas
previously the will to power operating throughout all metaphysics was
not consciously brought before the subject—was not willed as such—
with Nietzsche the will to power is willed as such.
What is significant to the present discussion is the way in which art
functions as the highest value for the will to power. Heidegger outlines
the value-function of art as follows:
53
Art is the condition posited in the essence of the will to power for the
will's being able, as the will that it is, to ascend to power and to
enhance that powCT. Because it conditions in this way,a rt is a value.
As that condition which—in the hierarchy oft he conditioning pertain
ing to the making secure of a constant reserve—takes the lead and in
that way precedes all conditioning, it is the value that first opens all
heights ofa scent. Art is the highest value.I n relation to the value truth,
it is the higher value.( WN 1977,86)
As the highest value,a rt not only sustains the will to power,b ut also
fosters the will to power in its increase. Since the will to power manifests
itself in the technological exploitation of the earth, to foster the will to
power in its increase is also to foster the extreme danger oft echnology.
But if art sustains and fosters the extreme danger oft echnology,h ow can
it foster the saving power?
This paper is pursuing an answer to the question," How can art foster
the saving power?"T he question is not," How does art only or necessar
ily foster the saving power?," for the saving power aM the extreme
danger are found in the realm of art. This means that the extreme danger
oft echnology does not disappear when we reflect on or participate in art.
Because the extreme danger of technology ever-remains, Heidegger's
call to foster the saving power remains a call. Hearing this call, we ask,
"How can art foster the saving power?" But here the danger appears
once again.I n his book,H eidegger's Estrangements,G erald Bruns says
that the question itself is technological:
The question of how the work works is a question concerning
technology.I t belongs to what Heidegger will call Ge-stell or Enfram
ing ofo ur time. This is by no means a bad question in itself. We belong
to our own time and cannot expatriate ourselves to other worlds. Not
to be analytical or structually-minded—not to understand the impor
tance of how works of art are made and how their rules of operation
are to be described—is not to have grasped the emergence of art in the
age of technology.( 1989,37)
Because we wish to grasp the emergence of art in the age oft echnology,
and we wish thereby to see the upsurgence of the saving power, we
cautiously embrace a technological question. But how should we
approach an answer to this question?
Hoelderlin says:
54
where the danger is, grows
the saving power also.
Heidegger's thoughts on the saving power begin with a meditation on
this poem-fragment. For Heidegger, the saving power must be thought
in relation to the danger—indeed, according to Hoelderlin, the danger
and the saving power occur in the same location or whereabouts. Let us
then prepare for an answer to our question by examining the extreme
danger of technology.
Nietzsche tells us that "the time is coming when the struggle for
dominion over the earth will be carried oa It will be carried on in the
name of fundamental philosophical doctrines"( 1967, XII:411). Hei
degger interprets "fundamental philosophical doctrines" to mean "the
language of the truth of what is as such, which truth metaphysics itself
is in the form of unconditional subjecmess of the will to power"( WN
1977,101). If the struggle is carried on in the name of the will to power,
then presumably the technological exploitation of the earth finds its
source and justification in the will to power.T he will to power manifests
its dominion over technological activity in at least two ways.F irst,i n the
technological age "what is" appears to us as standing-reserve, as that
which is useful for the maintenance and increase of man's power over
what is. In language, for example, we reduce the earth, and even other
human beings,t o "resources," to that which is ready-to-hand for human
be-ing. Effectively, we reduce Being to a value, and this reduction
constitutes the essential activity of the value-positing will to power.
Secondly, technology demands exactness, demands that what is be
revealed as a calculable coherence of forces that is at the same time
manipulable by the subject. Exacmess allows the subject to exact value
from what is, and so be certain of its standing-reserve. In this way,t hen,
the exactness of technological activity betrays its source in the will to
power, which requires exactness to secure its standing-reserve.
These observations confirm Heidegger's thought that modem meta
physics thinks the Being of whatever is in the sense of wiU,f or a thing
is said to be only insofar as it is exposed as something of value for the
will. But if a thing is said to be only in terms ofi ts value for the will,t hen,
in the technological age. Being appears as the product of the will to
power,t hat is, as the object of unconditional subjectivity, or as the will
to power itself. Heidegger demonstrates the reduction of Being as
follows:
55
Everything that is, is therefore either the object of the subject or the
subject of the subject. Everywhere the Being of whatever is lies in
setting-itself befwe-itself and thus in setting-itself-up. Man, within
the subjectness belonging to whatevCT is,r ises up into the subjectivity
of his essence. Man enters into insurrection. The world changes into
object. In this revolutionary objectifying of everything that is, the
earth, that which first of all must be put at the disposal of representing
and setting-forth, moves into the midst of human positing and analyz
ing. The earth itself can show itself only as the object of assault, an
assault that, in human willing, establishes itself as unconditional
objectification. Nature appears everywhere—because willed from
out of the essence of Being—as the object of technology.( WN1977,
100)
Nevertheless, the technological assault on natiu-e is "justified"
because the very act of objectifying and positing value by the will to
power is an act ofj ustification:
The truth of anything that is in being,i n the sense of the self-certainty
of subjectness,i s, as secureness (certiludo), fundamentally the mak
ing-right, the justifying, of representing and of what it represents
before representing's own clarity. Justification (iustificatio) is the
accomplishing of iustitia [jusmess of righmess] and is thus justice
[Gerechtigkeit] itself. Since the subject is forever subject, it makes
itself certain of its own secureness. It justifies itself before the claim
to justice that it itself has posited.( WN 89-90)
To flesh out the "justice" ruling in and justifying the age of
technology, Heidegger turns to Nietzsche's metaphysical concept of
justice. For though it appears strange to us, it is really all too familiar
because it "touches squarely the essence of the justice that at the
beginning of the consummation of the modem age, amidst the struggle
for mastery of the earth, is already historically tme, and that therefore
determines aU human activity in this period, whether explicitly or not,
whether secretly or openly "( WN 1977, 92). The first note from
Nietzsche, bearing the title, "The Ways of Freedom" (1884), reads:
"Justice, as building, separating, annihilating mode of thinking, out of
valuej udgments; highest representative ofl ife itself'( 1967, XIII; Aph.
98). The second( 1885)r eads:" Justice, as function of a power having a
wide range of vision, which sees out beyond the narrow perspectives of
56
good and evil, thus has a wider horizon ofi nterest—the aim,t o preserve
Something that is more than this or that particular person"( 1967, XIV;
Aph. 158). Nietzsche's "insight," that the justice holding sway in the
will to power is a building, separating, annihilating mode of thinking
wholly indifferent to this or that human being, harmonizes with
Heidegger's diagnosis. For if in the technological age everything
appears as the object of technology, man too appears as an object of
technology.A nd if, moreover, man is challenged-forth into an antitheti
cal relation to everything that is, human be-ing becomes its own
antithesis in the act of assaulting itself as an object of technology.
If man,t oo,i s subjected to the imconditional subjectivity oft he will
to power, what is the Something thatj ustice preserves? Nietzsche says,
"Right=the will to eternalize a momentary power relation"( 1967, Xlll;
Aph. 462). In the effort to secure an increasing standing-reserve,
objectifying and justifying transform everything that is into objects for
the subject's use. In so doing, the subject delivers itself up to the
objectifying will,s ubjects itselft o assault as so much "resource,"a nd so
finds itself measured against the imassailable standard of usefulness.
But for the use of whom or what do we allow ourselves to be thus
overpowered?
Because the process of justification turns assaultingly upon the
subject itself, and so ultimately preserves Something that is neither
human nor "just" in the human sense, the process of justification is
essentially unjustifiable. Undoubtedly, the statement, "the process of
justification is unjustifiable," is primed for a philosophical/technologi
cal analysis, for philosophy thrives on the paradox—that is, thrives on
justifying to itself the as-yet-unjustified. But here we enter into an
endless circle because what is imjustified is the imcanny truth that
justification itself is essentially imjustifiable. Nevertheless, we are
called into the technological activity of challenging-forth, objectifying
and justifying all that is, so we cannot simply give up the attempt to
justify the as-yet-unjustified, even when it is essentially unjustifiable.
Therefore,t he process ofjustification can never be completed.T he will
to power must forever goad itself onward to greater power and thereby
threaten revealing with the possibility that "all revealing will be con
sumed in ordering and that everything will present itself only in the
unconcealedness of the standing reserve"( QCT 1977,315).
But isn't this possibility, with which technology threatens reveal
ing, actually an impossibility? For Heidegger says that "If the essence
57
of technology, enframing, is the extreme danger, if there is truth in
Hoelderlin's words, then the rule of enframing [technology] cannot
exhaust itself solely in blocking all lighting-up of revealing, all appear
ance of truth" (QCT 1977, 310). Though the uncanny truth of the
unjustifiability of justification indicates a nontechnological mode of
revealing ("nontechnological" in the sense that it cannot be ironed-out
by technological thinking), we cannot yet assert that we have grasped
the upsurgence of the saving power. For the appearing of a nontechnol
ogical truth, such as the imjustifiability of justification, may function
precisely as art does in the domain of the will to power. Indeed,j ust like
Nietzsche's conception of art, the appearance of the unjustifiablity of
justification insures the unending rule of technological thinking be
cause it is and wiU always be as-yet unjustified. But though we have not
yet solved the original problem, we may suspect that the real danger of
technology does not lie in its completion—as if technology could ever
ultimately suffocate all revealing except the revealing of mere standing-
reserve. Perhaps the real danger of technology is that the very nature of
the unending, self-devouring and regurgitating process ofj ustification
seduces man away from his attendance on the revealing/concealing.
Heidegger says: "When the Being of whatever is, is stamped as a
value and its essence is thereby sealed off, then within this metaphys
ics—and that means continually within the truth of what is as such
during this age—every way to the experiencing of Being itself is
obliterated"( WN 1977,103). That which essentially stamps as a value
is the wiU to power, which is surfacing today as the metaphysics, the
rationale, of technology. Hence, within the metaphysics of teclmology,
which today is themetaphvsics.e very way to the experiencing of Being
itself is obliterated. Yet the experience of Being is crucial to man's be
ing, as Heidegger demonstrates when he says that the essence of man is
his attendance on the revealing/concealing of Being. By obliterating the
way to the experience of Being itself, the metaphysics of technology
robs man of his essence. Therefore, the extreme danger of technology
is that, by seducing man into the unending process of justification,
technological thinking displaces (yer-ruecki) man from his attendance
on the revealing/concealing and so robs him of his essence.
Because the extreme danger of technology is that man becomes
displaced from his essence, the saving power must necessarily restore
man to his essence.F urthermore,b ecause the displacement of man from
his essence is accomplished in the unending process of justification/
58
ordering into which man is gathered, the restoration of man to his
essence comes about in man's confrontation with that which is unfamil
iar, uncanny, and essentially imjustifiable. But unlike the as-yet-imjus-
tified proposition," Justification is essentially unjustifiable," that which
is decisively unjustifiable must defy the will to power itself, which
grounds the unending process ofj ustification, and so make the will to
justify collapse.I f art can foster the saving power in its increase, art must
be such that it can foster man's confrontation with the radical otherness
to which man essentially relates. Now we must ask," How can art foster
this confrontation?"
For Heidegger,a rt is not to be understood as an object or" thing."A rt
is not the thing that art dealers and critics busy themselves with, nor is
it primally the created object of a creative subject. In" The Origin oft he
Woric ofA rt," Heidegger teUs us that "Precisely where the artist and the
process and the circumstances of the genesis of the woric remain
unknown, this thrust, this 'that it is' of createdness, emerges into view
most purely from the work:" (1977, 182). Therefore, art is not to be
imderstood from the subject-object relation, in which subjectivity
determines the work as its ground and thereby justifies the work of art
to itself. Instead, art is essentially that openness of beings into which
man allows himself to be transported:
the more purely the work is itself transported into the openness of
beings—an openness opened by itself—the more simply does it
transport us into this openness and thus at the same time transport us
out of the realm of the ordinary.T o submit to this displacement means
to Uansform our accustomed ties to world and to earth and henceforth
to restrain all usual doing and prizing,k nowing and looking, in order
to stay within the truth that is happening in the work.O nly the restraint
of this staying lets what is created be the work that it is. This letting
the work be a work we call the preserving of the work Preserving
the work means standing within the openness of beings that happens
in the work.( 183)
Thus, art is art only insofar as we submit to the displacement from
the ordinary,t echnological world,a nd let the work be a work—preserve
the work.P reserving the work,h owever, which means" standing within
the openness of beings" and staying within the truth at woik in the woik,
is an extraordinary event. For in his essence man is the one who stands
ek-staticaUy in the openness of beings, and who stays within the truth
by attending on revealing/concealing.T herefore,b y transporting us into
59
the openness of beings wherein we essentially attend on the revealing
and concealing, art allows us to be restored to our essence.
Submitting to displacement from the technological worid into the
openness of beings implies a radical otherness. For submission implies
acknowledging an Other who defies being justified, ordered,o verpow
ered. In Heidegger's Estrangements, Gerald Bruns argues that this
radical othemess we confront in the work of art is the otherness of the
truth at work in the work. His insights concem the nature of truth as
Heidegger speaks of it in the following passage:
We believe we are at home in the immediate circle of beings. That
which is, is familiar, reliable, ordinary. Nevertheless, the clearing is
pervaded by a constant concealment in the double form of refusal and
dissembling. At bottom, the ordinary is not ordinary; it is extraordi
nary, uncanny. The nature of truth, that is, of unconcealedness, is
dominated throughout by a denial. Yet this denial is not a defect or a
fault, as though truth were an unalloyed unconcealedness that has rid
itself ofe verything concealed. If truth could accomplish this, it would
no longer be itself. This denial, in the form of a double concealment,
belongs to the nature of mith as unconcealedness. Truth,i n its nature,
is untruth.( OWA 1977,176)
It is part of the woiic oft he woik:o f art not to allow the foigetfiilness
ofc oncealment,o ft he imtruth oft he truth,t o occur. In this way the work
of art brings the othemess of truth to light. Heidegger hints at how
radical this othemess is when he mentions how cleanly the work of art
"seems to cut aU ties to human beings" (183). For Bmns, the tmth at
work in the work is
so wholly other that we can see nothing in it; it mirrors nothing we can
recognize.I ts othemess means that we can make no place for it within
any framework that makes the world an intelligible object for us.T he
work won't be an object for our subjective gaze, nor will it produce
or reproduce any such object (1989,45)
Art disconnects beings from the hold that we have on them.I f art
emancipates anything, it is not consciousness or subjectivity, but
rather the world. Art overturns the will-to-power: it takes the world
out of our hands and allows it to come into its own.( 46)
Therefore,f rom Brun's reading of Heidegger, we find that the tmth
at work in art is radically other it strips us of our ordering-grasp of the
60
world, overturns the will to power, and so wakes us from the solipsistic
slumber of subjectivity. The radical otherness of truth defies the very
objectification/justification that displaces us from our essence, and thus
makes restoration possible.
Hopefully,i t is now clear,o r at least less obscure, how art can foster
the saving power in its increase. The extreme danger of technology is
that, by seducing man into the unending process of justification,
technological thinking displaces man from his attendance on the reveal
ing/concealing and so robs him of his essence. Art, on the other hand,
forces man to confront that which defies all justification—the radical
otherness of truth. By submitting to displacement from the technologi
cal world,a nd by staying within the truth at woik in the work of art, man
is transported into the openness of beings wherein man can be restored
to his essence.
This interpretation of how art can foster the saving power harmo
nizes with Heidegger's thinking. In speaking of the saving power,
Heidegger says that" to save is to fetch something home into its essence,
in order to bring the essence for the first time into its genuine appearing"
(QCT 1977, 310). We have already shown how art can foster this
fetching-man-home into his essence. And,f ollowing Heidegger, we can
say that the genuine appearance of man's essence in the technological
age can first occur only when man submits to displacement from the
technological world into the openness of beings, where he realizes that
revealing is not exhausted in the revealing of mere standing-reserve.
But just as we have completed the task of answering the question,
"How can art foster the saving power?," a question that has remained
concealed now presses itself upon us: What is the saving power, that it
can be fostered by art in its increase?
By transporting us into the openness of beings wherein we essen
tially ek-sist, and by calling on us to stay within the revealing/conceal
ing that is the truth at work in the work, art can foster our ek-static
relation to the granting that sends into revealing. Heidegger says:
the granting that sends one way or another into revealing is as such
the saving power.F or the saving power lets man see and enter into the
highest dignity of his essence. This dignity lies in keeping watch over
the unconcealment—and with it, from the first, the concealment—of
all coming to presence on this earth.I t is precisely in enframing,w hich
threatens to sweep man away into ordering as the supposed single way
of revealing,a nd so thrusts man into the danger of the surrender of his
61
free essence—it is p^cisely in this extreme dangCT that the innermost
indestructible belongingness of man within granting may come to
light, provided that we,f or our part, begin to pay heed to the essence
of technology.( 314)
It is clear from this passage that the essence oft echnology,i n its relation
to the saving power, is "in a lofty sense ambiguous"( 314). On the one
hand,t he coming to presence of technology threatens revealing, and so
"radically endangers the relation to the essence of truth"( 314). On the
other hand, technology comes to presence finm and as a granting.
Because the granting itselfi s the saving power,a nd because technology
originates from the granting, technology harbors in its origins the
upsurgence of the saving power.
The upsurgence of the saving power in the origins of technology
comes to light in the truth of Van Gogh's painting.T he truth oft he shoes
in the painting—that is, their being as an object of technology—is not
merely technological because they reveal their origin in the granting:
In the shoes vibrates the silent call of the earth, its quiet gift of the
ripening grain and its unexplained self-refusal in the fallow desolation
of the wintry field. This equipment is pavaded by uncomplaining
worry as to the certainty of b-ead, the wordless joy of having once
more withstood want, the trembling before the impending childbed
and shivering at the surrounding menace of death. This equipment
belongs to the earth, and it is protected in the world of the peasant
woman.( OWA 1977,163)
The world of the peasant woman is grounded on the earth, not only in
the sense that her world (ripening grain, children, equipment, etc.)
emerges from the bare material of the earth, but primally because her
world emerges in relation to the earth's otherness, unjustifiability. The
peasant woman is granted a way of revealing that secures her world
against the uncertainty oft he earth.T herefore,t he shoes are usefiil to the
world of the peasant woman only because usefulness is first granted to
her as a way of revealing the unconcealed in her relation to the radical
otherness of the earth.
By staying within the truth at work in Van Gogh's woik of art, we
find that technology essentially harbors the saving power in the way that
technology comes to presence from and as a granting. Indeed, the
tenacious and unrelenting nature oft echnological activity is intelligible
62
only when it is understood as a way of revealing that is granted to us. But
if both technology and art share a belongingness to the granting that
sends into ways of revealing, and if as techne they are both ways of
bringing-forth truth, we must ask a further question: why is art, rather
than technology,t he "more primally granted revealing that could bring
the saving power into its fi rst shining-foith in the midst oft he danger that
in the technological age rather conceals than shows itself( QCT1977,
315)?
The answer to this question lies in the essential difference between
art and technology, a difference we find in the different ways that they,
as modes of revealing, relate to the radical otherness of truth. Because
the saving power as such is the granting that sends into ways of
revealing,t he realm which primally fosters the saving power must be the
realm in which truth is brought forth as a granting. But to grasp the truth
that man is granted various destinies of revealing, one must grasp the
truth that man essentially relates to a radical, non-human Other. As we
have seen, art can foster the saving power precisely because it forces
man to confront the radical otherness of truth. However, this confron
tation does not imply an antithetical relation to truth—rather, the
confrontation is the displacement from the technological world into the
openness of beings. By staying within the truth at woik in the work of
art, one confronts the otherness of truth in at least two ways: one
confronts the uncanny otherness of the material or earth that comes to
bear in the work of art, and one confronts the uncanny truth that world
and earth are in constant strife against one another. That art forces man
to confront the radical otherness of truth is the startling "that it is" of
createdness in the work of art.
In contrast, the createdness of the technological object essentially
disappears into usefulness.T he technological object serves technologi
cal activity to the degree that the material of the object does not" come
to bear" but perishes into the usefulness of its function in the human
world. Thus, technology requires not confrontation with the otherness
of truth, which is a condition for the fostering of the saving power, but
a forgetting or turning-away from the otherness oft ruth. This forgetting
of the otherness is essential to technology as a way of revealing, which
is why Heidegger says that the extreme danger is the revealing itself.
Moreover, this foigetting makes possible the solipsistic illusion of
subjectivity, holding sway in the technological age,t hat we everywhere
and always confront only ourselves.
63
In conclusion, art can foster the saving power in its increase, and it
distinguishes itself from technology as the revealing that is primally
granted for this task,b ecause oft he way that it relates man to the radical
otherness of truth. By displacing man ftom the technological world,
which necessarily foigets the otherness of truth, into the openness of
beings wherein man essentially ek-sists, art allows man to be restored
to his essence as the one who attends on the revealing/concealing( truth).
In reflecting upon art we must never foiget its intimate relation to
revealing and concealing,t he constellation of truth. For Heidegger tells
us that art can foster the saving power in its increase "only if reflection
upon art for its part, does not shut its eyes to the constellation of truth
concerning which we arc questioning"( QCT,3 17).
Bibliography
Bruns, Gerald. Heidegger's Estrangements:L anguage, Truth ~ Poetry
in the Later Heidegger. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989.
Heidegger, Martin. "The Origin of the Work of Art"( OWA). Trans.
Albert Hofstadter in Basic Writings.E d.b y David Krell. New York:
Harper & Row, 1977.
, "The Question Conceming Technology" (QCT). Trans.
William Lovitt in The Question Concerning Technology and Other
Essays. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
. "The Word of Nietzsche: 'God is Dead'"( WN). Trans.
WiUiam Lovitt in The Question Concerning Technology and Other
Essays. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Will to Power. Trans. Walter Kaufmann and
R.J. Hollingdale. New York: Random House, 1967.
64