Aporia vol. 19 no. 2—2009
The Chinese Room:
Qualia and Semantics
Joshua Mitchell
Throughout the literature generated by Searle’s Chinese Room
Argument, the Robot Reply has persistently beckoned a more thor-
ough response. Many proponents of AI have stood their ground
in holding that there is something intuitively correct about such a reply.1
For example, critics such as Bridgeman and Abelson contend that if a
super robot were able to interact with the world, then this should generate
understanding, as is seen in children. (Abelson actually uses the term “sen-
sorimotor” for the phenomena needed for the machine to do such a thing
(424).)2 It is this requirement that I shall address directly. Assuming that the
utilization of robotics is encompassed by the school of strong artificial intel-
ligence, I will contend that this can take the system in question only so far.
Indeed, the robot will never understand any concepts that directly involve
qualia, despite any newfound sense of sensorimotor phenomena.3 In fact,
we will see that even if the strong AI school is able to account for semantics
1 By A.I., throughout the entirety of this paper I am referring to strong AI; i.e., the idea that a
physical symbol system is both necessary and sufficient for intelligence.
2 By sensorimotor, I am referring to phenomena such as sight and hearing that allow us to associ-
ate a concept’s given syntax with its content via these sensorimotor skills (e.g., this furthers one’s
understanding of an apple if she can mentally picture an apple because she has seen one previ-
ously. This remains true for other sensorimotor phenomena such as sound, as it heightens one’s
understanding of terms such as “melodic minor scale.”)
3 For an explanation of qualia, see section II of this paper.
Joshua Mitchell is a senior from the University of Virginia majoring in philosophy as
well as Middle Eastern languages and literatures. His interests include Arabic and
Persian poetry, philosophy of mind, ethics, and philosophy of religion. Upon gradua-
tion, he will be commissioned as a Naval Officer in the United States Navy.
46 Joshua Mitchell
using only syntax, this inability to understand qualia will prevent a robot
from fully understanding many terms that inadvertently involve qualia.
In what follows, I will describe the Robot Reply in response to the
Chinese Room Argument and argue that qualia are necessary to fully under-
stand terms that refer to the qualia themselves. Furthermore, I will argue
that even if strong AI were able to achieve semantics solely on syntax, the
symbol system’s inability to observe qualia would still preclude human-level
understanding for the relevant terms associated with the respective qualia.
Finally, I will explore how many terms and concepts this truly affects.
I. The Whimsical Robot Reply (and What it is Missing)
First, it is crucial to note that the Robot Reply, even taken at best, is
not within the grasp of strong AI in its original formulation. The doctrine
of strong AI explicitly states that “the appropriately programmed computer
really is a mind in the sense that computers given the right programs
can literally be said to understand and have other cognitive states” (Searle
417–18). This suggests that all that constitutes understanding is what can
be done by syntax alone. However, for the sake of argument, let us assume
that strong AI can appeal to sensorimotor phenomena. What, then, would
this offer to Newell and Simon’s successors?4
As Bridgeman points out, “the robot can internalize meaning only
if it can receive information . . . with a known relationship to the outside
world” (428). In other words, if the robot has sensorimotor connections
with the external world, then the correlations between the entity being
understood and the external information can be realized, which will
inevitably aid in some type of understanding (in particular, external infor-
mation that allows for internal pictorial representations). Although Searle
ultimately contends that this is not true understanding, Bridgeman attempts
to demonstrate that it is.5 In doing so, he makes a fair analogy of a robot
learning the number five as would a child, “where the occurrence of the
string of symbols representing ‘five’ in its visual and auditory inputs cor-
responds with the more direct experience of five” (427). Thus, if this type
of association is what enables children to learn, then this becomes plau-
sible for the robot. Consequently, it is implicative of different tiers of
understanding. Surely, this would correspond with the different tiers
of intelligence observed in animals.
4 Newell and Simon are often considered the main architects of strong A.I. For a comprehensive
description of their thesis, see Haugeland Mind Design II.
5 We assume, of course, that Searle’s concept of understanding is a human one.
the chinese RooM 47
However, lest we forget, the doctrine of strong AI demands that the
system’s (in this case, the robot’s) understanding must be comparable to
that of the human mind.6 Thus, if there is some aspect of human-level
understanding that the system will never achieve, then strong AI has ulti-
mately failed. And while the allowance of robotics in the classification of
strong AI seems to mirror some understanding comparable to humans,
prima facie, there is in fact a phenomenon that is crucial to the human level
of understanding that the robot will almost certainly never have: the
phenomenon of qualia.
II. Qualia
Undoubtedly, one may be skeptical of the idea that qualia are needed
to understand concepts that refer to the individual quale (e.g., to fully
understand what the general term “fear” is, one needs to have had a fear
quale). However, let us consider that qualia by definition are the raw feels
of experience (i.e., the “what it is like” of experience) (Nagel 1974). Under
Nagel’s scrutiny, we find that these “subjective characters of experience”
are defined and understood solely by our experience of them (which is why
they are unique to species, and arguably person specific as well. Thus, if
one has never experienced a certain quale, then it is difficult to believe
that one truly understands the meaning of any terms directly related to that
quale.7 For example, suppose Billy is a small child who has been raised in a
utopian society where there exists nothing that invokes fear. Now, Billy con-
tinually reads about what it is like to be afraid, so he knows someone who
is afraid becomes light headed, clammy, slightly nauseous, etc. Perhaps we
can even venture to say that he understands what fear is to a certain extent.
However, if Billy is released into the real world and someone jumps out
in front of him dressed as a monster, he certainly understands fear more
now than he did before.8
There is another way to argue that qualia contribute to the meaning
of their relevant qualia terms. We can picture some world in which there
6 Newell and Simon claim that being a physical symbol system is both a necessary and sufficient
condition for exhibiting intelligence, and intelligence is taken to be in the domain of the human.
7 Note that when I say one does not truly understand a term’s meaning, I mean that they do not
understand it at the optimum level, i.e., there is another higher and reasonably obtainable tier of
understanding still left to reach.
8 There are certain parallels between this and Jackson’s thought experiment on Mary’s Room
(291–95). However, I am not taking a stance between physicalism and dualism here. What is
important to see is that the presence of a quale has heightened, to some extent, one’s understand-
ing of a given concept—likewise, we could always conjecture that when Mary leaves the room she
does not learn new facts, but rather, her understanding of certain facts is heightened.
48 Joshua Mitchell
is a set of physical duplicates that have inverted qualia.9 It seems dubi-
ous at best to assert that if the duplicates have the identical belief “I am
overjoyed,” but one is really experiencing the melancholy quale, that they
really mean the same thing. Therefore, since the meaning of the identical
sentence has been altered by the presence of a particular quale, we can see
that qualia must have some influence over the meanings of their respec-
tive qualia terms.
Thus, we may say that to fully understand things involving any given
qualia term (e.g., being red, scary, joyful, lustful, the note C#) requires that
one experience the relevant quale (e.g., hearing the note C#). We can even
see this as true for more complex concepts. Take for example claustrophobia
and altruism. Claustrophobia is, of course, fear of enclosed spaces. In order
to understand the word “claustrophobia,” one would have to understand
each constituent term which that word encompasses (fear, enclosed, spaces,
etc.). However, since fear is a quale, one must experience fear in order to
fully understand the term. The same reasoning goes for “altruism” and
other seemingly complex words.
Thus, so far we may state the following:
1. To fully understand concept C requires under-
standing all sub-conceptual constituents of C
(namely C1–CN).10
2. If any of the constituents [C1–CN] are in fact
a qualia QP, then one must also fully understand
QP to fully understand the set [C1–CN], and con-
sequently C.
3. The only way to fully understand QP is to experi-
ence QP.
Still, a proponent of strong AI may contend that if a robot is capable
of sensorimotor phenomena, perhaps the robot can realize its own set of
qualia by experiencing the world through these phenomena. While this
initially seems to be a reasonable line of thought, there are some difficul-
ties that unavoidably meet such a claim. For this to be feasible, qualia must
not be imbedded biologically (i.e., they must not be exclusive to biological
beings). However, there is some empirical evidence that seems contrary to
this. Various medical observations indicate that people who have a certain
9 This is, of course, assuming this is possible for the sake of argument. I am in no way taking a
stance on whether or not this is actually possible, but merely wish to demonstrate the influence
of qualia on meaning.
10 The “–” meaning “through,” not “minus.”
the chinese RooM 49
genetic trait do not feel the pain quale.11 This may suggest that qualia are
deeply imbedded in some biological phenomena. Of course, this does not
mean more research is not needed. It merely shows that there are in fact
correlations between biological factors and certain qualia. However, aside
from looking to scientific data, there is a much more general concern. We
have absolutely no idea how the human brain produces qualia (we cer-
tainly have ideas, but nothing is for certain), let alone how to reproduce
them in a machine. Thus, it appears the burden of proof is on those who
claim that machines could have qualia. This is not to say that one day
this will not occur. Inarguably, more empirical research will answer this,
as this specific issue is an empirical one. However, surely one would con-
cede that as of now it is a notion which is quite dubitable.
Thus, let us add to our summary:
4. Assume that all qualia Q are biologically
embedded.
5. Machines are not biological, thus cannot have
biologically embedded entities.
6. Therefore, any C which includes any qualia Q
as a constituent cannot be fully understood by
machines.
One will certainly note that there is a very large assumption that plays
a pivotal role in the argument thus far (i.e., that all qualia are biologically
embedded). I will acknowledge it as such, and thus perhaps my argument is
somewhat modest in nature because of it. However, one will also note the
above justification for such an assumption at this time.
III. The Importance of Qualia from Another Perspective
To further my point on the importance of qualia in fully understand-
ing concepts, I am going to make an allowance to the proponents of strong
AI. Let us assume that perhaps one day the strong AI programmers success-
fully generate significant semantics solely from syntax. In this case we can
imagine their reasoning as follows: Perhaps there are a handful of qualia
terms (and even some words or concepts such as claustrophobia) that
the system will not be able to understand at the human level. However,
not only are there words which the robot can understand that only
depend on sensorimotor phenomena for understanding (e.g., simple
associations between a syntactic expression and phenomena such as
11 Specifically, the lack of the SCN9A gene. See Woods.
50 Joshua Mitchell
inner-pictorial representation), but there are also many words where
the need for such phenomena is simply implausible. Therefore, the
“deficiency” of attaining human level understanding of language is
a small one.12
Yet, one must be careful when making general claims such as these.
Indeed, after much scrutinizing, what initially seems quite certain is rather
quite the opposite. For example, to many the concept of neutral evolution
seems to be merely a fact—just a definition of a relatively abstract fact.
Prima facie, this requires neither inner sensorimotor phenomena nor qua-
lia. However, I will show that this example collapses under examination,
thus weakening the objection.
Let T be any given complex or abstract term (like neutral evolution).13
More likely than not, T can be broken down into simpler terms or concepts
W, X, Y, Z, etc., of which T consists (e.g., neutral evolution can be broken
down into concepts of species, mutation, fitness, advantage, and so on).
These terms W–Z . . . will either be irreducible, or they will lend themselves
to being broken down into simpler terms of which they consist. Eventually,
all the terms or concepts will be at an irreducible level. So long as at least
one of these terms or concepts requires either qualia or sensorimotor phe-
nomena in order to be understood (and one would assume the number
would be much greater than one term), T cannot be understood fully
without such phenomena.14
In our example, the abstract term “species” can be broken down into
mammals, reptiles, and so forth, and of those I have a mental image of
a stereotypical animal.15 Arguably, if I do not possess the ability to have
an inner pictorial image of an animal when I think species, I cannot truly
understand what a species is.16 If so, I will not have a full understanding of
what neutral evolution is. We have already granted that perhaps the robot
12 I would like to thank Professor Paul Humphreys for raising this objection in one of our many
discussions as well as the example of neutral evolution.
13 Note that I am not considering things that are holistically mathematical in nature. I am only
considering terms and concepts which in general are semantically reducible, given the presented
procedure above.
14 It is necessary to point out once more that our goal is to understand a given term or concept to
the highest degree reasonably possible for a human, as the human is the standard for the mind
being emulated by a machine. If the machine cannot do this, then strong AI has arguably failed.
15 See Minsky.
16 Such an idea can be gathered from the externalist point of view. If I never see a “mother,” then I
cannot have an inner image of “mother” in my head when I think of her. If this is true, then surely
I do not have a full understanding of what “mother” entails. If nothing else, we would say that one
who can picture a “mother” in their thoughts has a fuller understanding of what “mother” is then
one who does not possess such an image.
the chinese RooM 51
does have these inner-pictorial representations, so for the sake of argument
we may conjecture that the robot can understand thus far, in that it is able
to correlate the term “animal” with some image. However, we have previ-
ously established that qualia will not be present. Thus, when the robot is
met with a sub-term requiring qualia, it will run into some trouble, as is the case
in this example. Considering sub-terms pertaining to neutral evolution,
“advantage” is certainly one of them. The concept advantage entails the
concept of success, which in turn entails some raw feeling of achievement,
even if only at a subconscious level. If one cannot fully understand this
raw feeling of achievement, then one cannot fully understand what suc-
cess truly is. This would certainly be the case if one was not aware of this
quale, as one recalls from the previous example of Billy and fear. If this is
the case, then one does not have the optimal understanding of advantage,
and so on. Some cases are more obvious than others, but seemingly there
is a difference in the level of understanding between an agent who has not
experienced the relevant quale (or qualia) and an agent who has. And since
we are dealing with the mind, per the doctrine of strong AI, we must use
the average human being as our standard of evaluating a system’s satisfac-
tory level of understanding. Regardless of how small the difference is, so
long as the average human can understand it, the machine must follow suit.
IV. The Objection of Partial Understanding
Perhaps one might object concerning the very fact that we are using
the “average human” as the standard of understanding. Indeed, the AI
proponent might claim that even humans can understand certain concepts
without having to fully understand every constituent sub-concept therein.
For example, when a high school student takes an introductory calculus
course, surely he does not understand every concept of integral calculus, but we
would certainly want to claim that he understood it to a satisfactory, average
degree. If this is so, then can the robot not reach an average understanding
which bypasses some of the more difficult and complex sub-concepts of
a given topic?
Such an objection may seem reasonable, but here there is a minor
discrepancy. First, let us imagine a concept C with sub-conceptual con-
stituents forming a hierarchical pyramid. The most crucial sub-concepts
are at the bottom, whereas the more detailed and specialized concepts are
at the top. Obviously, the foundational concepts are the most important to
have in order to achieve any kind of understanding. Now, in the calculus
objection, the student may not know every concept and still have an average
understanding of the subject, but certainly she has almost all (if not all) of
52 Joshua Mitchell
the foundational sub-concepts. Concomitantly, we will assume that even
if we said that it were possible for a robot to achieve average understand-
ing with only some of the sub-concepts being understood, surely we would
all concede that they would need to be the foundational sub-concepts.
However, how many concepts have qualia as part of their “fundamental”
sub-concepts?
Anything that pertains to romance or love certainly has qualia
terms as fundamental concepts (such as affection, happiness, sadness,
etc.). Anything that has to do with seeing colors, or hearing things will
also follow suit. Furthermore, we note the breadth of inclusivity here. For
example, with colors this extends from understanding what we mean in
talking about rainbows, to describing optics and wavelengths in physics.
For hearing, this extends from simply discerning the tunes a bird sings,
to understanding the meaning of beats generated by sound wave interfer-
ences. We notice a pattern that things involving sensory phenomena find
themselves easily on this list, and in fact, there is much in our world which
invokes terms pertaining to sensory phenomena. These things seemingly
require an understanding of their respective qualia upfront in order to
have a fundamental comprehension. I leave it up to the reader to think
of other explicit examples, but feel that we may agree that the number we
could eventually generate would be large enough to drastically reduce the
force of this objection.
V. Conclusion
In light of this discussion, what should one take away from such dis-
course? I will highlight what has been presented in this paper below.
First, the Robot Reply, although contrary to the original doctrine of
strong AI, only allows the system to have dumtaxat minimal understanding
of words or concepts where only associations between syntax and internal
representations through sensorimotor phenomena are needed. However, it
fails to account for the qualia needed for a full, human-level understanding
of the world. Second, even if Searle is completely wrong in his Chinese
Room Argument, and we postulate that one day computer programming
could allow for semantics to be derived from syntax, qualia would still not
be present—thus posing the same barrier as in (1). Third, as of now, the
burden of proof with computers generating qualia is with the program-
mers, granted that it is not even known how qualia emerge in the human
species. And fourth, the problems that arise from the first and second
point thus seem to be inescapable.
the chinese RooM 53
Because language is the model that strong AI uses for cognition,
it must also be its barrier. If there are areas of language that cannot be
accounted for, then arguably there will be areas of cognition that are unac-
countable in the strong AI model as well. In particular, it seems that any
part of language that at some level (and more often than not at some foun-
dational level) could require semantic understanding of qualia is out of
strong AI’s grasp. This is because the algorithms used in computational
systems are linear. Therefore, if there are issues that are unaccounted for
at the base of a concept or combination of syntax, the end result (which in
this case in understanding) will inevitably fail to achieve a human level of
understanding. Thus, the question we must now pose is how much language
will be inhibited?
As I have pointed out, any words or concepts that have to do with
colors, emotions, or feelings require qualia in order to achieve their full
understanding (so these are “off limits” to AI). However, any word whose
sub-constituent words or concepts involve qualia will also be forbidden
in terms of an AI system’s full understanding. This includes the more
obvious terms such as “claustrophobia,” but also may include more coun-
terintuitive concepts such as neutral evolution. When all these words and
concepts are tallied up, I believe they will be a significant amount.17 Perhaps
this is an empirical question—and if it is, then we must conduct further
linguistic research in order to determine how strong a limit AI is work-
ing against.
Computers, in their history of “evolution” within the past fifty
years, have irrefutably attained many respectable and awe-inspiring things.
However, it has been the purpose of this paper to demonstrate that one
should always be skeptical of the notion that a non-living machine could
ever possess qualities that are (so far as science has told us) exclusively
intrinsic to higher living and breathing organisms. My position can thus
be seen as a medial one between the one extremity of Searle’s thesis (being
that computers will never be able to understand any semantic content)
and the doctrine of strong AI, which subscribes to the exact opposite view.
While computers may at one point be able to have some elementary level
of understanding, so long as qualia are deemed to have some significance
within the realm of understanding (which, I believe they always will),
computers will ever so ceaselessly remain, as Hubert Dreyfus so elegantly
puts, “at an impasse” (143).
I would like to thank Jason Megill for all of his sugges-
tions and critiques of this paper.
17 Although perhaps not in the sheer number of unique terms, but in the frequency that they either
appear in sub-constituent concepts and as “qualia terms” themselves.
Works Cited
Abelson, Robert. P. “Searle’s argument is just a set of Chinese symbols.”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3.3 (1980): 424
Bridgeman, Bruce. “Brains + programs = minds.” Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 3.3 (1980): 427.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. “From Micro-Worlds to Knowledge Representation:
AI at an Impasse.” Mind Design II. Ed. John Haugeland. Cambridge:
MIT P, 1997. 143–82.
Jackson, F. “What Mary Didn’t Know.” Journal of Philosophy 83 (1986):
291–95.
Minsky, Marvin. “A Framework for Representing Knowledge.” Mind Design
II. Ed. John Haugeland. Cambridge: MIT P, 1997. 111–142
Nagel, Thomas. “What is it Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83
(1974): 435–50.
Newell, Allan, and Herbert A. Simon. “Computer Science as Empirical
Inquiry: Symbols and Search.” Mind Design II. Ed. John Haugeland.
Cambridge: MIT P, 1997. 81–110.
Searle, John. R. Minds, brains, and programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
3.3 (1980): 417–24.
Woods, Geoff. Cambridge Institute for Medical Research as reported by the
Cambridge University press release on December 11th, 2006 <http://
www.admin.cam.ac.uk/news/press/dpp/2006121102>.