A P O R I A
ASTUDENTJOURNALOFPHILOSOPHY
Editor
Jeffrey Johnson
Associate Editors
Russell Farr
Tully Minoski
Justin Perry
Justin White
Aporiais published twice each year by the Department of Philosophy at Brigham
Young University and is dedicated to recognizing exemplary philosophical work
at the undergraduate level. The spring issue each year includes the winning essays of
the annual David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition, which is open to BYU
undergraduates only, along with other outstanding philosophical essays submitted
by undergraduate philosophy students from around the world. The winners of the
Yarn Competition are selected by a faculty committee independent of the student
editors and staff, who make all other publishing decisions. The fall issue is pub-
lished online and consists of papers selected by the editorial staff. Submissions are
welcome from all undergraduate students, both at BYU and elsewhere.
The Aporia staff is especially grateful to those who support makes this journal
possible. Special thanks go to Professor Dennis Rasmussen, chair of the Department
of Philosophy, Professor David Jensen, our faculty advisor, and to Linda Hunter
Adams of the Humanities Publication Center. Aporiais funded by a generous con-
tribution from the David H. Yarn Endowment. Those wishing to contribute to this
fund may do so by contacting the BYU Department of Philosophy.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the respective authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect the opinions of the editors, the Philosophy Department, or
Brigham Young University.
http://humanities.byu.edu/philosophy/aporia.html
Aporia Vol. 16 number 2-2005
Locke and the Contemporary Situation
TYSON MOHR
A
t the time of its writing, the political theory put forth in Locke’s
Second Treatise of Government was a powerful source for individual-
ists. However, the nature of society has changed significantly, cast-
ing doubt on how applicable his theory is for modern individualists. The
most significant of these changes is the lack of unoccupied land. Since all
of the land in the world is claimed by some country, people are forced into
a pre-established society and do not have the option to create their own.
This also restricts whether people are able to leave their societies. Another
significant change is the increased number of highly populated states,
which diminishes the effect that minorities can have on their government.
These aspects of our contemporary situation serve to diminish the amount
of freedom an individual would have under Locke’s theory, making it a less
relevant source for Libertarians and other contemporary individualists.
Locke’s Theory
First let us begin with a brief description of the relevant sections of
Locke’s political theory as put forth in the Second Treatise. In his theory,
government originates from a need for security. People naturally exist out-
Tyson Mohr is a senior at Illinois State University majoring in philosophy and mathemat-
ics. After graduation, he plans to work in business for several years and then attend gradu-
ate or culinary school.
2 TYSONMOHR
side of organized society in the “state of nature” (Locke, Two Treatises of
Government289).1Although every person has natural rights in the state of
nature, these rights cannot be consistently protected without a commonly
recognized judge (291). Everyone has the right to seek reparations for dam-
ages and to defend her health and property. However, since people some-
times fail to use reason properly on account of self-interest and emotion,
they cannot be trusted to always judge calmly and reasonably, especially
during times when injustices have been done to them (293). This might
lead them to take more reparations than they should for the injustice that
was done for them. Also, some people in the state of nature might not be
strong enough to take the proper reparations. This leads to a great lack of
security, and, as a result, many injustices occur for which improper repara-
tions are made. People determine that these unpunished injustices can be
avoided if common laws are created and enforced by an organized group.
Additionally, foreign invasion threatens those in the state of nature.
Without an organized military and the protection of a group, individuals
are at great risk of being invaded by other organized groups. An effective
defense against attack can only be implemented by a community. So,
knowing that security is in their best interests, people congregate in order
to form a government. This arrangement is carried out for the mutual ben-
efit of protection against interpersonal conflict and foreign invasion. Thus,
in Locke’s theory, people are “driven into Society” from the state of nature
out of a need for security (370).
However, this security does not come without a price. In order to
enter into society and reap its benefits, individuals must relinquish certain
freedoms. More specifically, they must give up some control over their
affairs and possessions as well as their right to seek reparations for damages
in whatever way they see fit. These natural rights are given to the judicial,
legislative, and executive branches of the government with the understand-
ing that they will be used responsibly in order to provide security and pro-
tect property (370–71). Perhaps the most important part of this process is
that individuals’ rights can only be voluntarily relinquished. No person,
group, or government body can justly force individuals to relinquish free-
doms they do not wish to relinquish. Herein lies the importance of consent.
1
All subsequent references in this paper to John Locke’s Two Treatises of
Government will be given only by page number.
LOCKEANDTHECONTEMPORARYSITUATION 3
Consent must be given by individuals in order for any government
to have power over them. Locke states that “all Men are naturally in [the
state of nature], and remain so, till by their own Consents they make them-
selves Members of some Politick Society” (296). People cannot be forced to
follow laws without their consent. However, Locke’s understanding of con-
sent is quite broad. People do not necessarily have to consent officially;
they give their consent whenever they enter a society’s territory (365). By
entering such a territory, they benefit from the protection of the society’s
government and therefore are obliged to reciprocate by temporarily relin-
quishing the requisite rights. In other words, they must follow the laws of
that society for the duration of their stay. However, people must also be
free to leave a society since forcing them to stay would force them to follow
laws without their consent, something that Locke considers to be unjust.
In general, the choice to stay in a location protected by a government is
viewed by Locke as a choice to follow that government’s laws.2
After the government has been formed, it must begin making poli-
cies. Since every individual has sacrificed in order to reap certain benefits
from the community, it is sensible that every individual should have a say
in the decision-making process. He does not even consider the possibility
that a minority should rule. Since society is a singular body comprised of
a number of individuals, he thinks it follows that “the Body should move
the way whither the greater force carries it, which is the consent of the
majority” (350). Presumably, Locke would also argue that minority rulers
have a tendency to act like monarchs by ruling arbitrarily and exploiting
those not represented in the minority.
It is clear for Locke that some type of majority must rule. One type
of majority is unanimous consensus, and it seems reasonable to assume
that, since everyone relinquished the same rights to enter society, everyone
should agree to the society’s laws. However, Locke recognizes that attempt-
ing to achieve a unanimous consensus for every decision is practically
2
Locke distinguishes between explicit consent, which is an official commitment
to a society, and tacit consent, which occurs when someone enters a territory.
Although Locke is ambiguous about what benefit those who explicitly consent
have over those who do not and whether those who explicitly consent are ever
allowed to leave their society, the broad definition of consent described above is
sufficient.
4 TYSONMOHR
impossible (ibid.). There will always be disagreement about any significant
policy and failing to take this into account in the workings of a government
will fatally cripple it. Thus it is unreasonable to expect decisions to be
made by unanimous consensus. The only other option is to have the soci-
ety be ruled by the majority’s consent. Abiding by majority is not ideal, but
it is the only way by which a government can function (351). Consequently,
an individual’s agreement to enter into a society is also an agreement to
abide by the will of that society’s majority. Though the decision to enter
into society is the individual’s decision, the decision results in the individ-
ual becoming part of a community that is, in Locke’s words, “one Body,
with a Power to Act as one Body, which is only by the will and determina-
tion of the majority” (349).
Fortunately, one major restriction affects decisions made by majori-
ties—they cannot infringe on certain inalienable rights. Although individ-
uals give up certain rights in order to enter a community, some rights can-
not be taken away under any circumstances. These rights include the right
to own property and the right not to be ruled arbitrarily (418). Any law that
infringes upon inalienable rights, even if imposed by the majority, is unjust
and consequently should not be followed. These laws break the trust the
government has with its citizens, giving them the right to overthrow the
government (433). Majority decisions in a community become law, but
these laws only have legitimacy if they do not infringe upon an individual’s
inalienable rights. In summary, Locke argues that government offers pro-
tection in exchange for individuals’ consent to relinquish certain rights to
it, and Lock argues that laws should be established based upon the will of
the majority—provided these laws do not infringe on inalienable rights.
The Contemporary Situation
Now that the relevant sections of Locke’s theory have been reviewed,
the issue of whether it would support individualist views in the contempo-
rary situation will be examined. The political, social, and technological sit-
uation in Locke’s time was very different from the contemporary situation.
During Locke’s time, his theory was considered very individualistic; how-
ever, it would be considered less individualistic if implemented in contem-
porary society. Individualists have always believed in increasing personal
liberty and reducing the ability of government to exert excessive control
LOCKEANDTHECONTEMPORARYSITUATION 5
over the populous. Locke’s arguments parallel these individualistic argu-
ments as Locke argues for private property, against arbitrary rule, and for
considerable focus on natural rights. In fact, implementing Locke’s theory
in seventeenth century monarchies would have increased (and in some
instances actually did increase) personal liberty. However, when consider-
ing current democracies, implementing his theory would actually do little
to meet the goals of contemporary individualists.
Contemporary individualists, such as Libertarians, still argue in favor
of increasing personal liberty and against excessive government control.
However, they now do so mainly by arguing that government should be
minimal and therefore should increase privatization, interfere less in mar-
kets, lower taxes, and provide fewer government programs. Many individu-
alists use Locke to support their views. Examples of this trend abound in
libertarian literature, articles, and websites.3 Although Libertarians may
indeed have a viable position if supported on other grounds, their attempts
to appeal to Locke for support fail due to the nature of Locke’s theory. If
put into place now, Locke’s theory would dictate that people with progres-
sive individualist views, being a minority, be prepared to live in a society
which is not aligned with their views without an effective means to bring
about change. Locke’s theory advocates following the mandates of the
masses, something that the contemporary individualist typically does not
promote.
The most significant effect of the contemporary situation is that
there is no longer an option under Locke’s theory for those who are not
3 Examples of such works include books like Robert Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and
Utopiaand Michael P. Zucker’ts Launching Liberalism:On Lockean Political
Philosophy. Articles include Michael Otsuka’s “Self-Ownership and Equality: A
Lockean Reconciliation”; Tibor Machan’s “Libertarian Answers to Conservative
Challenges”; and Neil Lock’s “How to Pay for Government.” Finally, websites of
this type include the Ludwig von Mises Institute’s www.mises.org and Reason
Online (www.reason.com). These works are not intended as the results of a thor-
ough summary of Locke’s role in Libertarian literature but merely as some exam-
ples of the trend. From my experience, Libertarian use of Locke’s theory seems
very widespread and not in need of extensive proof. I will assume this is the case
without further investigation until I encounter an objection to it.
6 TYSONMOHR
willing to join an existing government. In describing the beginning of
political societies, Locke uses the term in vacuis locis, which means “in
empty places.” These places, according to Locke, are “free and unpos-
sessed” by any state (367). It is to these empty places that individuals
should go if they wish to start a new society rather than accept member-
ship in any present society. There were such places in Locke’s time, and he
frequently uses America, presumably meaning North America, as a prime
example of a continent filled with such areas (311, 314, 318, and 319).
However, as any American can tell you, there are no longer such places in
America nor in any inhabitable part of the world. There are some unset-
tled places, such as deserts or forests, but they are nevertheless annexed by
some state.4 This presents a large problem for those who do not desire to
live in any established society. Locke advises creating a new society if you
disapprove of current one, but there is frankly no land in vacuis locis on
which to do this. The only option for individuals is to pick the society they
most prefer and follow the laws established by its majority. The contempo-
rary situation still gives us a choice, but it is between which group of peo-
ple we consent to obey rather than between joining some existing society
or starting our own with which we are guaranteed to agree. Consequently,
in Locke’s theory, we have to accept the status quo of some current state,
a definite problem for contemporary individualists who feel that no cur-
rent state is minimal enough to align with their worldview. Their only
option is to join the most minimal society available and attempt to bring
about change. However, this latter option is also not as easy as it may seem.
Technological advances in transportation and communication have
dramatically increased not only the territory that governments control but
4
Private islands which are currently available for purchase fall into this same cate-
gory of unoccupied but annexed land. According to www.privateislandsonline.com,
a website which sells such islands, "Since the early20th century, every square foot
of dry land on Earth has been claimed by at least one country or another, which
pretty much rules out…setting yourself up as the local sovereign." Though it is
very possible that this website could be mistaken, I believe they have a vested
interest in being informed on this issue. The only way one could set up a new
government on these islands would be to purchase land from a country or con-
vince the country which owns it to release it, which no country would be willing
to do in any normal circumstance.
LOCKEANDTHECONTEMPORARYSITUATION 7
also the influence they have over their territory.5 It is now very common
for single governments to legislate and enforce laws that affect millions or
even billions of people. One might even argue that, with the rise of global-
ization, it might not even be economically possible for smaller states to
have any economic power in the world. Regardless, the population of the
vast majority of contemporary states creates a situation that diminishes the
impact individuals can have on the laws governing their lives. Not only do
their votes carry less individual weight, but it is also difficult to bring about
change in the popular mentality. In a small community, an individual can
make her arguments known to the entire community relatively easily. But
when a community numbers in the millions or billions, the majority is so
large, diverse, and geographically distant that it is nearly impossible to
effectively make one’s position known.6 One must then follow the collec-
tive decisions with little avenue for discussion. This consequence is defi-
nitely problematic for the contemporary individualists. After being forced
to enter into a pre-existing society and accept the status quo, she now finds
herself with the difficult challenge of convincing millions of people to
change their views. Until she can accomplish this, Locke is clear that she
must abide by the decisions of the majority on pain of being unjust.
There remains one option in Locke’s view, rebellion. If individualists
can determine that the government’s laws are arbitrary or are infringing on
their inalienable rights, Locke clearly states that they would be justified in
inciting a revolution. However, this final option isn’t much of an option
after all. Even though there are no contemporary states minimal enough
to fit Libertarian standards, there are contemporary states, such as the
United States of America, Canada, and Western European states, where
5
Obviously, there were large groups of people contained under one government
in the past, such as those in the Roman or British empires. These differ from
contemporary states, however, in that they were ruled by militant means and
were undemocratic. The issue of size comes into play when states are democratic
since the larger number of voters affects the influence one citizen has on poli-
cies.
6
This claim is intended as a generalization. There are indeed places where mil-
lions of people live in close proximity to each other or where the population is
not extremely culturally diverse. However, in the vast majority of states, distance
and diversity play the role discussed.
8 TYSONMOHR
rebellion would not be justified under Locke’s view. Such rebellion would
be unjust because current individualist grievances do not constitute,
according to Locke, justifiable grounds for rebellion. Take, for instance,
the Libertarian issue of lower taxation. In the states mentioned above, the
government does not tax arbitrarily and so the only other option is to
determine that such tax laws infringe on natural rights. The right to own
property is indeed a natural right, and a government that takes property
without consent is indeed tyrannical and should be rebelled against. But
Locke clearly argues that having to pay taxes is not an infringement on nat-
ural rights. In fact, he states that “Governments cannot be supported with-
out great Charge, as ‘tis fit everyone who enjoys his share of the Protection,
should pay out of his Estate his proportion of the maintenance of it. But
still it must be with his own Consent, i.e. the Consent of the Majority”
(380). Taxation is necessary for government, and it is part of the price peo-
ple pay for security. People cannot be taxed without their consent, but,
since people in the contemporary situation must consent to join some gov-
ernment and since every government in the world currently taxes, people
must give consent to be taxed.7 Similar results can be obtained for other
Libertarian grievances. The problems Libertarians have with their govern-
ments may or may not be legitimate, but they are not so extreme as to jus-
tify revolution based on Locke’s theory.
It follows, then, that if individualists find themselves in a state that
is not aligned with their views, rebellion would be justified or unjustified.
If it is unjustified, they may, within the realm of just actions, only choose
to leave for another state or obey the established rules while attempting to
bring about change in the popular mentality. In either case, they must live
in a society not aligned with their views. If rebellion is justified, the indi-
vidualist could help bring about the rebellion and overthrow the current
government. At this point, a new government would be created based on
the views of the majority of the members of the new society. If it happens
that these people are Libertarians, then a Libertarian state could be justly
created. However, it is most likely that the majority of the revolutionar-
ies would have less individualistic views and decide to create another
7
The only country that is known not to tax today is Waveland; however,
because Waveland's territory is so small and barren, citizens of Waveland must
live in another country and are therefore still subject to taxation.
LOCKEANDTHECONTEMPORARYSITUATION 9
non-minimal state. Provided that this new state is not arbitrary and pro-
tects natural rights, individualists are again in a situation where they must
submit to the will of the majority. Thus rebellion offers a chance for the
creation of a Libertarian state, but the chance is very small. Whether or
not rebellion is justified under Locke’s view (which, in the modern situa-
tion, it most likely would not be), rebellion is still the most likely option
that individualists will be forced to choose when trying to change a non-
minimal government.
Thus we see the dilemma that contemporary individualists face if
they follow Locke’s theory. Since all land is occupied by some state, they
must choose to consent to a pre-existing state. Upon doing so, they bind
themselves to following that state’s laws. Since laws are established by
majority rule, those with minority views must obey laws with which they
do not agree. The option of rebellion would either be unjust or would very
likely lead only to the creation of another non-minimal state, both of
which leave individualists in an undesirable position once again. The only
other option is to bring about gradual change by convincing the majority
to change their views. However, since the majority in many states is so
large, this is an extremely difficult and lengthy process. In the meantime,
they must follow their society’s laws.
Conclusion
Locke’s political system was revolutionary in its treatment of individ-
ual rights. Society, in Locke’s view, is comprised of a group of consenting
individuals who bind together for their common prosperity and security.
Though Locke’s system originally provided much support for individualists
and resulted in increased political and economic liberty when implement-
ed, it does not offer much support in our contemporary situation; the lack
of unoccupied land and number of highly populated states prohibit it from
doing so. Locke’s theory, if applied to our modern world, would force peo-
ple to consent to the rules of an existing society and give them little
recourse for changing policies to be more aligned with their views.
Works Cited
Locke, John. Two Treatises of Government. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1967.