Aporia vol. 18 no. 2—2008
A Proposed Counterexample to Klein’s
Theory of Knowledge
B. D. MooneyhaM
In his essay “A Proposed Definition of Propositional Knowledge,” Peter
Klein addresses a famous problem in epistemology raised by Edmund
Gettier. In short, Gettier challenges the traditional definition of knowl­
edge—justified true belief—by providing counterexamples to the definition.
Gettier shows that justified true belief is not sufficient for knowledge; in
other words, there are cases in which someone is justified in believing a
true proposition, but in which we would not say that the person knows the
proposition in question. This presents a problem because a good, robust
definition (of the kind epistemologists desire) ought to provide necessary
and sufficient conditions of the item being defined. Since Gettier, many
philosophers have attempted to formulate new definitions that are immune
to these defeating counterexamples. This is what Klein attempts to do in
his essay . However, I will offer counterexamples to show that not all the
ele ments of Klein’s definition are necessary conditions for knowledge; his
definition is too strong.
I will first briefly summarize one of Gettier’s famous counter­
examples. Two people, Smith and Jones, apply for a job. Smith is justified
in believing that Jones will get the job. Smith is also justified in believing
that Jones has ten coins in his pocket. On the basis of these beliefs, Smith
draws a further conclusion which is logically entailed by the first two propo­
sitions: the man who will get the job has ten coins in his pocket. However,
Smith turns out to be the one who gets the job, and by coincidence, Smith
B. D. Mooneyham recently completed a dual degree at Kansas State University,
majoring in philosophy and economics. In the fall of 2009, he plans to attend law
school, where he will study regulation and jurisprudence. His philosophical interests
include epistemology, ethics (especially Kantian ethics), philosophy of law, and the
history of philosophy.
32 B. D. MooneyhaM
also has ten coins in his pocket. On a common understanding of justifica­
tion, Smith was justified in believing that the man who would get the job
had ten coins in his pocket because it followed from two statements which
he was justified in believing. Furthermore, this statement turned out to be
true. However, it is unclear that Smith had knowledge in this case, so justi­
fied true belief must not be sufficient for knowledge (Gettier 121–3).
In his paper, Klein analyzes Gettier­type counterexamples like the one
above in order to discover a common feature inherent in each one. By iso­
lating a single aspect of the traditional definition of knowledge that leaves
it vulnerable to these counterexamples, Klein intends to solve the Gettier
problem. After examining several examples, Klein holds that knowledge
does not obtain in these cases (even though justified true belief does
obtain) because of a relevant true proposition that affects the “evidence”
for believing another proposition. In the example above, Klein would argue
that Smith was unaware of the proposition that the employer would hire
him rather than Jones; had this been evident to Smith, he would no longer
have been justified in believing that Jones would be hired.
In addition, Klein identifies a unifying principle illuminated by the
Gettier­type counterexamples, which he calls the “felicitous­coincidence
principle.” This principle refers to situations in which the standard condi­
tions for knowledge hold, but only by chance or coincidence. In Gettier’s
example, Smith, being unaware of the employer’s real intentions, happened
to be justified in believing that the man who got the job had ten coins
in his pocket. This does not seem to be quite enough for knowledge. Klein
relates the felicitous­coincidence principle to a passage in Plato’s Meno in
which Socrates argues that knowledge cannot be “true opinion” because
true opinion can arise by chance, whereas knowledge needs to be grounded
in something stronger than mere chance accuracy (472). Similarly, the
felicitous ­coincidence principle stipulates that justified true belief should
not be attained by chance; otherwise, the belief in question does not quali­
fy as knowledge. These reflections preface Klein’s proposed solution to the
Gettier problem.
Klein rejects one approach to solving the Gettier problem that involves
strengthening the notion of justification to entail that one can never be
justified in believing a false proposition. On this interpretation, Smith
was not justified in believing that Jones would get the job because that
statement turned out to be false. Neither was he justified, then, in believ­
ing that the man who would get the job had ten coins in his pocket. So,
Gettier’s example does not present a genuine case of justified true belief,
nor does it under mine the traditional definition of knowledge. In spite
of the simplicity of this response, few epistemologists support this strat­
egy because it excludes many cases in which knowledge intuitively obtains,
a ProPoseD CounterexaMPle to Klein’s theory of KnowleDge 33
even though the evidence for our belief does not strictly guarantee its truth.
Klein, by contrast, leaves the notion of justification relatively unchanged.
He instead supplements it in a way that strengthens the traditional defini­
tion enough to rule out the possibility for a felicitous coincidence. His
definition includes the following four elements:
S knows that p at t if and only if
1
(i) p is true;
(ii) S believes p at t;
1
(iii) p is evident to S at t;
1
(iv) there is no true proposition such that if it became evi­
dent to S at t p would no longer be evident to S. (475)
1
Essentially, Klein adds an extra clause to the traditional definition
of knowledge. The new clause suggests that knowledge does not depend
merely on one’s available evidence for a true proposition p, but relies on
the non­existence of any defeaters for p. A defeater for p (or what Klein calls
a “disqualifying proposition”) is any true proposition which eliminates the
evidence for p or offers prevailing evidence against p. By using the word
“evidence” rather than justification (as in the traditional definition), Klein
helpfully clarifies his concept of justification:
A proposition is evident to S at t iff it is more reason­
1
able for S to believe p at t (given his evidence for it) than
1
to withhold belief in p and there is no more reasonable
proposition for S to believe at t. A proposition may be evi­
1
dent yet false. It may be evident to S but fail to be evident
1
to S, because S knows something that S does not know,
2 1 2
for example. In that sense evidency is person­relative, but
it is person­neutral in the sense that, whatever makes p
evident to S, that and that alone would make p evident
1
to S. (476)
2
Having provided a clear definition of knowledge, Klein proceeds to
examine various potential counterexamples which could discredit his defi­
nition. He quickly establishes that “there can be no counterexamples to
show that the definition is too weak” (477). In other words, whenever all
four conditions obtain, one will always have knowledge. I do not wish to
argue that point here. Instead, I believe Klein too quickly dismisses the
counterexamples meant to show that his definition is too strong. The last
example that he considers, which he calls “the strongest that I know of”
(478), needs further attention than what Klein offers.
To paraphrase Klein’s example, Mr. Jones goes to M’s house, where
he is justified in believing that flowers are on the mantel. In fact, Jones
sees real flowers, but M is a magician who frequently creates the illusion of
34 B. D. MooneyhaM
flowers on the mantel. In this case, there is a defeater for Jones’s knowledge
that p (where p is “there are flowers on the mantel”). The defeater is the
proposition (I will call it d) that it is highly probable that M is creating
the illusion of flowers. Klein argues that, even in the absence of any aware­
ness of d, Jones does not know p. In order to insist that Jones knows that
p, Klein believes we must 1) reject the felicitous­coincidence principle as a
defeater for knowledge, and 2) concede an awkward description of Jones’s
knowledge that p. Since neither of these is a condition we want to accept,
we should instead deny that Jones knows p.
The felicitous coincidence principle applies because “in this partic­
ular case, even though the standard criteria hold, they are not reliable”
(479). Given M’s nature as a magician, the odds were more likely that M
would produce illusory flowers that night, which would make p false. If we
deny that a felicitous coincidence discredits Jones’s knowledge that p, then
we must also deny the validity of the Gettier­type counterexamples; the
felicitous­coincidence principle applies in both cases. Moreover, we are left
with the following “awkward” claim that Jones knew p before he discovered
that M is a magician; discovering this, d became evident to him, and he
no longer knew p. Finally, Jones discovered that M was not playing tricks
on the night of his visit, so Jones came to know p once again (479). Klein
wants us to question how one could seriously give this account of Jones’s
knowledge.
But perhaps the supposed awkwardness of such a description of
Jones’s knowledge merely reflects the complexity of circumstances in which
several facts present conflicting evidence for a given proposition. The magi­
cian counterexample illustrates a situation in which there exists a defeater
for one’s knowledge that p, but there is also a defeater for the defeater (the
fact that M was not creating illusions that night). I suggest that such cases
arise more frequently than Klein realizes, and that when these circum­
stances do arise, knowledge is still possible. A reworking of the magician
counterexample clarifies this claim and helps to weaken Klein’s charge
of awkwardness.
Consider a case in which Jones believes his wife is at work. He is
justified in believing this, because his wife told him she was going to work,
she almost never lies to him, she left at the same time she always leaves for
work, etc. Moreover, she is in fact at work during the time in which Jones
holds that belief. However, unknown to Jones, his wife’s sister arrived in
town that morning, meaning to surprise his wife with a visit and spend the
day with her. Jones is also unaware that his sister­in­law got a flat tire just
as she arrived in town and was forced to spend all day finding a mechanic.
Since Jones knows that his wife and her sister are very close and that they
drop all their plans to spend time together, then if Jones had known d, that
a ProPoseD CounterexaMPle to Klein’s theory of KnowleDge 35
his sister­in­law was in town, he would have probably retracted his belief
that p, his wife was at work, because p would no longer have been evident
to him. He would therefore no longer have known p. But then, discovering
the additional proposition e, “the sister­in­law had car trouble,” he would
again believe (and know) that his wife spent the day at work.
Is it really implausible to understand Jones’s beliefs in this way and to
hold that, without any awareness of d or e, Jones would still have known p
the whole time? If not, then Klein’s theory is in trouble. Unknown proposi­
tions like d and e could conceivably occur often, but on Klein’s theory we
must always deny that one has knowledge in these cases. Consider another
case in which Jones’s wife works in the State Capitol Building. One morn­
ing, a bomber plans to call in a threat to the building. State policies dictate
that the building be evacuated any time such a threat is received, so Jones’s
wife would have been forced to move across the street until the situation was
resolved. However, before the bomber’s plans could be realized, the police dis­
cover his intentions and intervene, preventing the threat. The proposition
“a bomber plans to threaten the State Capitol Building” could be enough
to make Jones’s belief p no longer evident to him, but the police depart­
ment’s intervention prevented this proposition from entering Jones’s mind
while he was considering whether or not his wife was at work.
Moreover, these seem like the kinds of circumstances that never would
enter Jones’s mind, because he does not have access to that kind of infor­
mation; and yet it seems reasonable to grant that Jones knows his wife is at
work. Both of the examples with Jones and his wife suggest that there could
often be possible defeaters for everyday knowledge claims, such that if we
were made aware of the defeater d by itself, p (the proposition in question)
would no longer be evident. Yet, in addition to defeaters there are often
defeaters for the defeaters as well. In order for us to know p, and not merely
to know that we know, Klein would require that none of these extenuating
circumstances ever occur without our awareness. But clearly these kinds
of circumstances do occur without our awareness. It follows that unless
Jones is omniscient, it will be almost impossible for him to distinguish the
days that he knows his wife is at work from the days that he does not, even
when the fact of her being at work does not change.
This line of argumentation may be unconvincing to Klein. After all,
is it not the same as saying that Jones will be unable to distinguish the
days that he knows there are flowers on M’s mantel from the days that he
does not, without consulting M? Klein would presumably have no problem
with this statement. He examines a similar objection while responding to
different forms of skepticism toward the end of his paper. The objection
claims that “if the definition [of knowledge] were accepted, it would never
be true that S knows that he knows that p because he could never know
36 B. D. MooneyhaM
that the fourth condition held” (480). However, these examples concern­
ing Jones and his wife are not intended to demonstrate the impossibility of
knowing that one knows p; rather, they show that Klein is overly optimistic
in the expectation of how often his conditions for knowledge will obtain.
His definition leaves out too many cases of knowledge to give us the kind
of results we expect from a good theory of knowledge. In this sense, Klein’s
theory should be rejected on the same grounds that Klein himself rejects
the attempts to retain the traditional definition. These attempts use an
overly strong sense of justification; here Klein too uses an overly strong
qualification for knowledge.
Returning to Klein’s first argument against the magician counterex­
ample, we are forced to abandon the authority of the felicitous­coincidence
principle. Any case of a “defeater for a defeater” seems like a felicitous
coincidence (e.g., the sister­in­law getting a flat tire), and we probably do
not want to use the principle to dismiss numerous cases of seemingly ordi­
nary knowledge. But this does not mean we have to reconsider whether the
Gettier problem is a problem. Perhaps the Gettier­type counterexamples
can be explained coherently using another common feature that would
reveal the problems regarding the traditional definition of knowledge.
Many epistemologists have in fact developed competing theories operating
under different assumptions about how to fix the traditional definition.
The fact that there are alternatives shows that we need not cling to the
felicitous­coincidence principle as an essential explanatory guide.
In summary, Klein offers two reasons to reject the counterexample
of Jones and the magician M. The first reason, appealing to the felicitous­
coincidence principle, can be overcome by showing (as others have done)
that this principle need not be decisive in solving the Gettier problem. This
paper has been concerned primarily with Klein’s second reason, which
holds that accepting the magician counterexample involves the use of an
awkward and unintuitive conception of knowledge. I have argued that this
is not the case by recreating the conditions of the magician example with
more plausible circumstances and showing that such cases are both perfectly
conceivable and knowledge­preserving. Considering that both arguments
against the magician counterexample can be overcome, Klein’s theory
fails to adequately defend against the objection that his criteria for knowl­
edge are too strong. His fourth condition is not a necessary condition
for knowledge.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Gettier, Edmund. “Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23
(1963): 121–3.
Klein, Peter. “A Proposed Definition of Propositional Knowledge.”
The Journal of Philosophy 68.16 (1971): 471–82.