Aporia, Vol. I, No. 1 (Fall 1991)
The One Beside the Many:
Aristotle's Early Theory of Universals
Howard Nielsen, Jr.
In his work the Categories, Aristotle presents an ontological system
that turns Plato's notion of reality upside down. While Plato had
identified universals with self-existent forms—the things that, within
Plato's ontology, were most real—Aristotle presents primary substance
(comprising the individual objects ofs ense-experience)a s that which is
most real. Universals, according to Aristotle, exist only as the species
and genera predicated of either (1)i ndividual substances (the species
'man'a nd the genus 'animal' predicated of the individual Socrates),o r
(2)t hose qualities present in individual substances (the color or white
ness predicated of Socrates' paleness).
Although Aristotle's ontology equates those things most real with
those things most immediately accessible to human experience,t hereby
making genuine knowledge both more available and more pertinent to
the ttogs oft his world, his notion of scientific knowledge still depends
heavily on the existence of universals. In several of his works,A ristotle
discusses the nature of universals and the process or processes through
wluch they can be known. Although in some ways Aristotle's theory of
universals is easier to grasp than is Plato's, it presents several unique
difficulties. In this paper I will (1) discuss briefly the role universals
play in Aristotle's theory of knowledge;( 2) attempt to reconstruct the
method(s)t hrough which these universals can be known;a nd( 3)d iscuss
some of the problems with Aristotle's theory of universals.
According to Aristotle, scientific knowledge is deduced from first
principles. These first principles must be universal," for the syllogism
proceeds through universal premisses" (APr. I.27.43bl4-15). For
ex^ple,I might aigue as follows: aU animals are mortal; all men are
ammals;t herefore all men are mortal. To aigue in this way I must know
something about the genus 'animal' and also something about the
species man'. Both of these terms refer to universal concepts.
Also, according to Aristotle, for knowledge to be scientific, it must
be necessarily true: the premises from which it is derived must be true
in every instance, and must be better known than the scientific knowl
edge derived from them. Because these premises are first principles,
they cannot be known through demonstration; they must be known
some other way.
On different occasions, Aristotle presents what at first appear to be
three different accounts of how we can obtain knowledge of universals.
In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle aigues that "it is intuitive reason
that grasps the first principles"( V1.6.1141a7-8).
In the Topics,h owever,A ristotle identifies dialectic as the source of
first principles:
It [this treatise on dialectical reasoning] has a further use in relation
to the ultimate bases oft he principles used in the several sciences. For
it is impossible to discuss them at all from the principles proper to the
particular science in hand, seeing that the principles are the prius of
everything else: it is through the opinions generally held on the
particular points that these have to be discussed,a nd this task belongs
properly,o r most appropriately, to dialectic: for dialectic is a process
of criticism wherein lies the path to the principles of all inquiries.
a.2.101a37-b4)
As Aristotle makes clear later in the Topics G12), and also in the
Posterior Analytics( APo.1 .1), dialectic can be ofe ither of two types-
reasoning (syllogistic), or inductive.
Aristotle gives a third, more detailed account of how universals
come to be known in both the Posterior Analytics GI19), and the
Metaphysics (Met. I.l). According to this account," we must get to
know the primary premisses by induction;f or the method by which even
sense-perception implants the uruversal is inductive"( APo.1 1.19.100b4-
5). Specifically, we first receive sense impressions. These impressions
remain in our souls, producing memory. Then, by systematizing
frequently repeated memories oft he same things, we obtain experience.
From the many notions we form through experience, we become able to
make universal judgments about certain classes of objects. Thus,
through experience, we obtain a notion oft he universal," the one beside
the many which is a single identity within them all"( l(X)a6-8).
According to this account, our notion of a universal begins with a
first sense-perception, and becomes increasingly accurate with each
additional perception:
When one of a number of logically indiscriminable particulars has
made a stand, the earliest universal is present in the soul: for though
the act ofs ense-perception is of the particular,i ts content is universal.
... A fresh stand is made among these rudimentary universals,a nd the
process does not cease until the indivisible concepts,t he true univer
sals, are established. (100al5-b3)
It is difficult to determine (1) whether these three apparently
different accounts are intended to fit together, and (2)i ft hey are indeed
so intended, in what way they connect. Aristofle's first two accounts
seem to allow for a rational approach to knowledge of universals.
Aristotle's immediate premises, which are, (according to the first
account)t hrough intuition "better known than and prior to the conclu
sion"( APo.1 .2.71521), seem,a t first glance,t o correspond to the 'clear
and distinct principles' of later rationalists. Also, the second account,
in which dialectic leads to a knowledge of universals, appears similar to
the account presented by Plato in the Republic of how dialectic can
discover the truth of first principles (V11.533l>-d). It is worth noting
again that Aristotle divides dialectic into reasoning and induction: by
classifying reasoning as a species ofd ialectic,A ristotle appears to allow
for a rational approach to knowledge of universals.
Although Aristotle's account(s)o f how universals can be known is
(are)a t best eclectic,i nduction appears to be the most important tool for
discovering first principles. It can be argued that the first account—that
of intuition—merely provides a name for the process described in the
third account that of induction. The fact that, immediately after
describing the process of induction, Aristotle states that "it will be
intuition that apprehends the primary premises" lends credence to this
possibility( APo. 11.19.100512). Also, induction is the basis of at least
one of the two types of dialectic to which Aristotle ascribes knowledge
of universals in his second account
Also,e ven though Aristotle's first two accounts seem to allow a role
for rationalism, this rationalism is likely based primarily on what we
know inductively. It might be possible, for example, that although we
can clearly intuit what must be so, we gain this ability from experience.
And perhaps the dialectical reasoning allowed by Aristotle proceeds
from premises known through (or at least guessed from)e xperience.
Aristotle's theory of universals presents several problems. Given
the ontological status Aristotle assigns to universals, as well as the
largely inductive method through which they are discovered, it is
questionable whether universals can provide us with the type of foun
dation scientific knowledge requires; for if knowledge is to be scien
tific, it must, according to Aristotle's definition, follow by necessity
from first principles known to be necessarily true.
According to Aristotle's ontology, universals exist only in individ
ual substances. A universal is "that which is of such a nature as to be
predicated ofm any subjects"( D/.7 .17a38-39). Secondary substances-
universal concepts like 'man' or 'animal'—^"do not merely indicate
quality, like the term 'white'... but species and genus determine the
quality with reference to a substance: they signify substance qualita
tively differentiated"( Cat. 5.3bl8-20).
Presumably, then, to say 'Socrates is a man' is to say that among
those things predicated of Socrates are those qualities ascribed to the
universal concept' man'—the essential qualities that make him a man.
But,g iven the ontological status Aristotle assigns to universals,i t is hard
to distinguish the essential from the accidental. Suppose that every man
were bom sitting down and remained forever in that position. Before the
first man stood up would the universal form of man be sitting? While
this notion seems ridiculous, it is hard to imagine how it could be
otherwise, if the universal exists only in its instances. While one might
argue that Socrates would still be a man if he stood up,i t would be hard,
under these circumstances,t o determine why he could stand and still be
a man,b ut not lose his ability to reason without losing his manhood. If,
then,( 1)a universal is merely something predicable of particulars, and
(2) a universal is known through experience alone, it is extremely
difficult to distinguish, ontologically, those qualities of a universal that
inhere essentially in each of its instances from those that are merely
found accidentally in each of its instances. This example shows the
difficulty of understanding what, precisely, AristoUe means by 'predi
cation'. It is therefore ontologically questionable whether universals
that exist only as things predicable of particulars can have an absolute,
unchanging status separate from those particulars. But, for Aristotle's
theory ofs cientific knowledge to work,u niversals must have this status.
In addition, for Aristotle's theory of inductive knowledge to work
we must assume that every man has the same mental experiences (D/.
1.16a5-10). This assumption means( 1)t hat every man must perceive
the world in the same way,( 2)t hat every man must classify experiences
in the same way, and (3) that every man must perceive enough of the
same sorts oft hings to develop identical experience—in other words we
must each experience enough men in the same ways that our concept of
the umversal 'man' will be identical. Connected with this assumption
is the notion, discussed above, that a universal can have a fixed nature
independent of its instances.
The second and third parts of this assumption are especially trouble
some. Suppose we grant the first part of this assumption, that men
perceive in the same way. Suppose we also set aside the question of
whether universals can have fixed, unchanging natures. Even so, this
account remains problematic. For instance,i magine a Native American
living in the Americas before the arrival of the Europeans: each of the
men he has experienced has had dark skin. In his mind, the concept
'mmi' may well include the quality of having dark skin. But even if this
Native American were to experience the coming oft he first Caucasians,
he might not classify these men under his existing concept of man. He
might, instead, think they were gods or demons.
The biggest problem with gaining knowledge of universals through
induction, then, is that we can never know for certain whether our
notions of these universals are complete and correct. Aristofle grants
that our notions of universals develop gradually through our perceptions
of each particular {APo. 11.19). This being the case, it would seem
impossible to know,e mpirically, when or if our notion of a universal be
complete or correct. Even though our notion of this universal might be
consistent with each ofi ts instances we have encountered, we can never
be certain no instances of this universal exist that contradict our notion
of the universal.
This being the case, it appears the concepts of universals gained
through induction cannot provide us with the necessarily true first
principles we must have if we are to have demonstrative knowledge that
meets Aristotle s criteria for scientific knowledge. It seems induction
can provide us only with the sort of knowledge claimed by those who
assert that they do not know that every pair is even, but only that
everything which they know to be a pair is even"{ APo. 1.1.71a34-bl).
But this sort of knowledge is not satisfactory," [f]orno premiss is ever
couched in the form 'every number which you know to be such'... the
predicate is always construed as applicable to any and every instance of
the thing"( 71b3-5).
Aristotle might argue that since a pair,b y definition,i s even,n othing
odd can be a pair. If we assume universals are simply definitions we
impose on reality, this argument holds. But it will not suffice if
universals are to exist independent of our definitions. Also, in some
cases,h olding to our definitions and refusing to classify particulars with
the proper universals because they seem inconsistent with our defini
tions would be like the Native American's classifying Caucasians not as
men, but as gods or demons.
It is clear,t hen,t hat given the ontological status Aristotle assigns to
universals and the largely inductive method he describes for obtaining
knowledge oft hem,t hese universals cannot meet the criteria he requires
them to meet if they are to be the first principles from which scientific
knowledge must be derived.
Bibliography
Aristotle. Categories. Trans. E. M. Edghill, The Basic Works ofAris
totle, ed. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
.M etaphysics. Trans. W.D .R oss,i n The Basic Works ofA ristotle,
ed. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
. Nicomachean Ethics. Trans. W. D. Ross, in The Basic Works of
Amror/d,e d. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
. On Interpretation. Trans. E. M. Edghill, in The Basic Works of
Arwtot/e,e d. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
-.P osterior Analytics. Trans. G.R .G . Mure,i n The Basic Works of
Arwtof/e,e d. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
—. Prior Analytics. Trans. A. J. Jenkins, in The Basic Works of
Amtot/e,e d. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
-. Topics. Trans. W.A. Pickard-Cambridge, in The Basic Works of
Amtot/e,e d. Richard McKeon. New York: Random House, 1941.
Plato. The Republic. Trans. Paul Shorey, in Plato: The Collected
Dialogues,e d. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1961.