A P O R I A
ASTUDENTJOURNALOFPHILOSOPHY
Editor
Jeffrey Johnson
Associate Editors
Russell Farr
Tully Minoski
Justin Perry
Justin White
Aporiais published twice each year by the Department of Philosophy at Brigham
Young University and is dedicated to recognizing exemplary philosophical work
at the undergraduate level. The spring issue each year includes the winning essays of
the annual David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition, which is open to BYU
undergraduates only, along with other outstanding philosophical essays submitted
by undergraduate philosophy students from around the world. The winners of the
Yarn Competition are selected by a faculty committee independent of the student
editors and staff, who make all other publishing decisions. The fall issue is pub-
lished online and consists of papers selected by the editorial staff. Submissions are
welcome from all undergraduate students, both at BYU and elsewhere.
The Aporia staff is especially grateful to those who support makes this journal
possible. Special thanks go to Professor Dennis Rasmussen, chair of the Department
of Philosophy, Professor David Jensen, our faculty advisor, and to Linda Hunter
Adams of the Humanities Publication Center. Aporiais funded by a generous con-
tribution from the David H. Yarn Endowment. Those wishing to contribute to this
fund may do so by contacting the BYU Department of Philosophy.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the respective authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect the opinions of the editors, the Philosophy Department, or
Brigham Young University.
http://humanities.byu.edu/philosophy/aporia.html
Aporia Vol. 16 number 2-2005
Absolute Simplicity in Locke's Theory of Ideas
JOÃO PAULO ALVES PEREIRA
I
ssues pertaining to the distinction between the simple and the complex
are crucial in philosophy. Philosophers of the early modern period are
notorious for using this distinction when building their philosophical
programs. They generally classify certain things as simple and others as
complex and then explain whatever is complex in terms of whatever is sim-
ple. What one takes as simple, as fundamental, defines the type of philo-
sophical program one will build. Sometimes, different choices about what
is to be considered as fundamental result in radically different philosophi-
cal programs. For instance, Leibniz starts his Monadology by making the
simple/complex distinction. He claims that since there are composites,
they must be composed of simple substances (monads). These substances,
then, are the basis of explanation for Leibniz. Differing from this view, we
have Locke’s take on substance. He claims that our ideas of substances are
inherently complex and that there must be simples which account for such
ideas. Because Leibniz takes the notion of substance as simple and Locke
does not, their programs will inevitably be different—for Leibniz substance
does the explaining whereas for Locke the idea of substance itself must be
explained. Thus, misunderstandings regarding both what the simples are
and the nature of those simples can mislead one in the interpretation of a
João Paulo Alves Pereira is a senior studying philosophy at the California State University
at Long Beach. Earlier drafts of this paper were written for a British Empiricism class at
CSULB. This final version would not be possible without the help of Ken Brown, to whom
the author is both deeply thankful and indebted for hours of conversations about Locke.
2 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
philosophical system. It is very important, then, that we correctly under-
stand the nature of the simple.
When it comes to Locke’s theory of ideas, the nature of the simples
has proven to be a particularly controversial issue in secondary literature.
Different interpretations of the nature of the simples lead to different
interpretations of other aspects of his theory, such as compositionalism.
“Compositionalism” is a name given to Locke’s classification of some ideas
as simple (e.g., colors, smells, and sounds) and others as complex (e.g., a
rose), and his explanation of complex ideas in terms of simple ideas: com-
plex ideas are composed of simple ideas. For instance, a combination of
certain colors, a certain smell, and a certain tactile feel composes the idea
of, say, a rose. However, the extent to which Locke is committed to compo-
sitionalism is a controversial issue. Some claim that Locke’s program is
compositionalist in the strong sense. According to this view, there are only
two types of ideas: simple and complex. Also, these two classes are exclu-
sive and exhaustive. Let us call this version “strong compositionalism”.
Others believe that Locke is not fully committed to compositionalism.
Such commentators claim that after some revisions of the Essay Locke
came to hold a weakened version of compositionalism in which ideas do
not have to be so rigidly classified as either simple or complex. According
to this view, not all non-simple ideas have to be complex. Let us call this
version “weak compositionalism.”1
As I suggested above, one of the reasons why this longstanding con-
troversy about the extent of Locke’s commitment to compositionalism still
lingers is because commentators have different views about the nature of
the simple ideas. One such commentator is Nicholas Jolley, who believes
that Locke holds weak compositionalism. This belief is related to Jolley’s
understanding of simple ideas. He believes that Lockean simple ideas are
“relatively” simple; in other words, simple ideas are divisible. We will soon
see that this interpretation of the simple ideas is consistent with a weak ver-
sion of compositionalism. The question, though, is whether simple ideas
are relatively simple or absolutely simple—having no separable parts.
1
This weakened version of compositionalism adopted by Nicholas Jolley is sug-
gested by R. I. Aaron.
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 3
Why does Jolley think simple ideas are relatively simple? One of
Jolley’s main goals in his discussion of Locke’s theory of ideas is to defend
him against the unfair treatment of other philosophers. Jolley says that
others have unfairly regarded Locke’s theory of ideas “as a series of mud-
dles” (Locke: His Philosophical Life29).2In order to save Locke from a dam-
aging objection raised by another commentator, D. J. O’Connor, Jolley
attributes to Locke the thesis of relative simplicity, the view that simple
ideas have parts.
However, Jolley’s position is problematic because relative simplicity is
inconsistent with his own views regarding the origin of complex ideas.
More importantly, the adoption of relative simplicity leads Locke to diffi-
culties regarding the distinction between simple and complex ideas. Such
a distinction is essential to a compositionalist system because one must be
able to distinguish simple and complex ideas before one can explain how
the former accounts for the latter. In order to avoid these problems, I pro-
pose the adoption of absolute simplicity, the view that simple ideas do not
have parts. Absolute simplicity not only avoids confusions regarding the so
important distinction between simple and complex ideas but is also more
consistent with Locke’s own claims in the Essay.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section I, I will discuss both
Jolley’s view on the origin of complex ideas and his reasons for adopting
relative simplicity. Then, in the light of this discussion, three arguments
will be provided that refute the viability of attributing relative simplicity to
Locke. In Section II, an alternative way of dealing with O’Connor’s objec-
tion, one that avoids the erroneous adoption of relative simplicity, will be
provided. In Section III, I will consider the consequences of rejecting rela-
tive simplicity for Jolley’s account of compositionalism and abstract ideas.
In Section IV, I will consider some concluding thoughts regarding a pos-
sible revision of Jolley’s interpretation that would be beneficial.
2
Further references to this work will be cited simply as “Jolley”followed by the
page number. Similarly, all other works will be referred to initially by their full
title and subsequently by only the name of their author followed by the number
of the page cited.
4 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
I. Refutation of the Relative Simplicity Thesis
Jolley claims that simple ideas are the only ones that are given to us
directly from either sensation or reflection. All complex ideas are the result
of the mind processing the simple ideas, the raw materials from sensation
or reflection, through various operations. In other words, the mind is pas-
sive with respect to all and only its simple ideas and active with respect to
complex ideas, which are formed by the various operations of the mind on
the simple ideas (Jolley 46). The result of this is that all and only simple
ideas are furnished by sensation. Complex ideas are notgiven in sensation;
they are the result of the activity of the mind.
Other commentators, like Vere Chappell, have a different view of
the origin of complex ideas. Chappell implicitly asserts that there are two
types of complex ideas: those coming from sensation (e.g., a rose) and
those coming from reflection (e.g., fictions). He claims that complex ideas
from sensation come into our minds ready-made and that the mind does
not have to employ any of its operations to form them. According to
Chappell, the mind only has to employ its operations in the production of
complex ideas from reflection. Thus, the mind is passive with respect to
some complex ideas. Sensation, then, furnishes us with some complex
ideas (“Locke’s Theory of Ideas” 37–8). As we have seen above, Jolley holds
the competing view that the mind is active with respect to all of its com-
plex ideas. Sensation, then, does not furnish us with complex ideas, as
Chappell claims. Jolley’s view is more compatible with what Locke says in
the Essayabout the origin of ideas than Chappell’s view, as will be argued
below.
Now that we have a better understanding of Jolley’s view on the ori-
gin of complex ideas, let us see what he means by a relatively simple idea
in light of what motivated him to attribute relative simplicity to Locke.
Jolley adopts the thesis of relative simplicity in order to defend Locke
against a criticism raised by O’Connor. In his objection, O’Connor claims
that the examples Locke provides for simple ideas do not fit the main cri-
terion Locke gives us for what a simple idea is. According to Jolley, Locke
thinks that the main criterion for the classification of ideas into simple
ones is based on experience: “simple ideas contain in themselves nothing
but one uniform appearance or conception in the mind” (45). O’Connor’s
objection not only says that the examples provided by Locke for simple
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 5
ideas do not fit this criterion, but, as Jolley himself recognizes, it implies
that “perhaps nothing in our experience strictly does so” (46). Let us con-
sider O’Connor’s attack on Locke and Jolley’s response to it, respectively.
First, O’Connor considers the examples Locke gives when simple
ideas are first discussed in the Essay. Locke says that the coldness and hard-
ness of a piece of ice, the smell and whiteness of a lily, the taste of sugar,
and the smell of a rose are all simple ideas because they have “one uniform
appearance,” the criterion for simplicity (An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding II.ii.1). Here is where O’Connor disagrees. O’Connor finds
that experience shows us that “simple sense data such as these [exam-
ples]…rarely present one uniform character indistinguishable into parts
which differ sensibly one from another, be it ever so slightly” (John Locke47).
Second, O’Connor implies that perhaps nothing, not only Locke’s exam-
ples, present such a character. He says that even if there was a certain col-
ored patch completely uniform in hue, which O’Connor probably believes
cannot be experienced, this patch would not be uncompounded because it
would be made up of smaller patches and, in that sense, would be spatial-
ly compounded (47). Jolley focuses on this latter aspect of the objection.
If O’Connor’s objection holds, Locke’s simple ideas simply do not
exist. Even ideas that are uniform in appearance are spatially compounded.
If this were true, it would be devastating for Locke’s position; without sim-
ples, any compositionalist program becomes fatally jeopardized, as one
clearly cannot build something (the complex) out of nothing (the nonexist-
ent simple). As Jolley recognizes, though, compositionalism is extremely
important for Locke’s program because it enables him to explain how we
arrive at ideas that are supposedly innate (e.g., triangles). “In terms of [his
compositionalism Locke] can explain how the mind is not limited to
receiving what is given in experience…it can frame radically new content
by combining or otherwise processing its simple ideas” (Jolley 48).
In order to save Locke from O’Connor, Jolley suggests that perhaps
Locke does not think that simple ideas are absolutely simple. Perhaps,
Jolley says, Locke considers simple ideas to be relatively simple. Let us see
what this relative simplicity amounts to and how Jolley thinks it could save
Locke from O’Connor’s objection. Absolute simplicity with respect to sim-
ple ideas would take them to be indivisible, uncompounded, foundational
units out of which complex ideas are made. Relative simplicity, on the
other hand, would take them to be divisible and compounded units, but
6 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
nevertheless units that form complex ideas. As Jolley says, a relatively sim-
ple idea is to a complex idea as a brick is to a wall. We consider the brick
to be a unit with respect to the wall even though the brick is composed of
smaller parts (Jolley 46). Relative simplicity, then, would save Locke from
O’Connor’s objection because the colored patch could still be considered
a simple idea even though it is spatially compounded. This solution is
ingenious, but it is not one without its own difficulties.
This view is inconsistent with Jolley’s denial of Chappell. In order to
elucidate this inconsistency, let us consider the following argument: just
like Chappell’s complex ideas from sensation, any given relatively simple
idea must be composed of parts (or else it would be absolutely simple).
According to Jolley, “to speak of a complex idea is to speak of a single, uni-
fied idea, and Locke is clear that it is the mind which imposes the unity on
elements which are given in experience” (47). Thus, the mind is active in
the production of complex ideas. Now, given that Jolley himself claims that
the mind is passive with respect to all and only its simple ideas, relatively
simple ideas are multipart ideas that are not unified by the mind. What
about Chappell’s complex ideas from sensation, what are they? They are
also multipart ideas that are not unified by the mind in that they come in
ready-made from sensation. Thus, we can see that Jolley’s relatively simple
ideas are tantamount to Chappell’s complex ideas from sensation. They
differ in name alone. Jolley cannot hold the thesis of relative simplicity if
he wants to reject Chappell’s complex ideas from sensation. The only way
we can refute Chappell is by adopting the thesis of absolute simplicity. By
doing so, one can say that the mind is active with respect to ideas that have
parts (complex ideas) and passive with respect to ideas that do not have
parts (absolutely simple ideas). Thus, the thesis of relative simplicity and
Jolley’s rejection of Chappell are incompatible.
The choice, then, is between refuting Chappell’s view that complex
ideas come from sensation or keeping Jolley’s idea of relative simplicity.
The former course of action fits better with certain passages in Locke’s
Essay. For instance, Locke says that by compounding (which is an opera-
tion of the mind) “all complex ideas are made” (II.xii.1, emphasis added).
Additionally, Locke states that “Though the mind be wholly passive, in
respect of its simple ideas…it is not so in respect of its complex ideas”
(II.xxx.3, emphasis added). These two passages make it clear that Locke
holds that the mind is indeed active with respect to all of its complex ideas.
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 7
Thus, we see that we should refute Chappell if we have any intentions to
be truthful to the text, which forces us to give up relative simplicity.
The second problem with attributing relative simplicity to Locke is
that it conflicts with a reasonable interpretation of some of what Locke
says in his discussion of simple ideas. For instance, Locke says that simple
ideas are “each in itself uncompounded” (II.ii.1, emphasis added). He also
says that “the ideas [that the qualities that affect our senses] produce in the
mind, enter by the senses simple and unmixed” (ibid., emphasis added). In
both passages, the italicized words suggest absolute simplicity. If ideas are
uncompounded and unmixed, then they do not have parts. Any idea that
does not have parts cannot be relatively simple. Furthermore, Locke says at
one point that one’s mind can neither destroy nor invent simple ideas
(II.ii.2). In saying this, Locke draws a parallel with the physical world. He
says that man’s “power…reaches no further, than to compound and divide
the materials, that are made to his hand; but can do nothing towards the
making the least particle of new matter, or destroying one atomof what is
already in being” (ibid., emphasis added). This comparison between our
inability to destroy simple ideas and our alleged inability to destroy atoms
cries out for absolute simplicity. Simple ideas are to the mind as atoms are
to the physical world. Our simple ideas are, like atoms—at least as Locke
understood them—indivisible and uncompounded, and, for this reason,
they are indestructible by the effect of the mind.
The third problem created by the adoption of relative simplicity is a
conceptual problem in Locke’s theory. As we have seen, in order to save
Locke from the objection that his view does not match how we actually
experience things, Jolley attributes to him relative simplicity. However, in
doing so, Jolley leads Locke’s view to an internal conceptual problem. If
Locke holds relative simplicity, then any given simple idea can be subdi-
vided into and is composed of an infinite number of smaller ideas, for if
such subdivision had an end point, then the end point would be absolute-
ly simple; as a result, we would have absolute simplicity. Now, consider a
complex idea that has relatively simple ideas as parts. Given that relatively
simple ideas can be subdivided ad infinitum, this complex idea would be
composed of an infinite number of ideas. However, any given simple idea
that composes it would also be composed of an infinite number of ideas.
How, then, could we differentiate these two ideas in terms of which one com-
poses which? There would be no criterion for doing so if both contained the
8 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
same infinite number of ideas. Why should we consider the one idea foun-
dational with respect to the other? How can the part have the same
amount of parts as the whole? This would make simple and complex ideas
indistinguishable. But simple and complex ideas must be distinguishable
for compositionalism to make any sense.
As we see, the attribution of relative simplicity to Locke is not a good
interpretation. First, such a move is inconsistent with another view that
Jolley himself holds, namely his refutation of Chappell’s claim that some
complex ideas are given in sensation. Second, relative simplicity conflicts
with a reasonable interpretation of some of Locke’s claims in the Essay.
Third, relative simplicity needlessly draws Locke into a conceptual problem
regarding the distinction between simple and complex ideas. Simple ideas
must be absolutely simple.
II. Is Locke Doomed?
I believe sufficient reasons were provided for attributing the doctrine
of absolute simplicity to Locke. However, relative simplicity was Jolley’s way
of saving Locke from O’Connor’s objection. After rejecting Jolley’s solu-
tion, must we automatically conclude that O’Connor’s objection works?
Does adopting absolute simplicity entail that Locke is susceptible to
O’Connor? I think the answer is no. I believe that Jolley needlessly tried to
solve a pseudo-problem arising from O’Connor’s objection. Consequently,
a rejection of Jolley does not entail a rejection of Locke.
O’ Connor says that a patch of red (even if it is uniform in appear-
ance) cannot be simple because it is spatially compounded. Let us look
closely at what a patch of red would be in terms of Locke’s distinction of
ideas. A patch of red is made out of at least two ideas: extension and the
color red. Thus, we have two ideas forming a new idea: a red patch. Since,
then, the red patch is formed by at least these two distinct ideas, it cannot
be simple (in the absolute sense). This idea is instead complex. O’Connor,
however, asserts that a red patch is a simple idea. If we accept this claim,
then it seems that the only way we can account for how a red patch can be
spatially compounded and still be a simple idea is by attributing relative
simplicity to Locke. However, if one adopts absolute simplicity, one does
not even have to address this problem. We would say to ourselves: “of
course a patch of red is compounded; after all, it is a complex idea. It is the
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 9
character of complex ideas to be compounded and to be able to be subdi-
vided. This,” we would say, “is not a real problem.”
One could say that I should not consider a patch of red as composed
of two distinct ideas. “If that is the case,” one would say, “we would never
experience a simple idea of red by itself because we always experience the
color red spread out in space. A patch of red, then, is better conceived as
one idea,” the objector would conclude. Let us see what Locke has to say
about this: “’Tis true, solidity cannot exist without extension, neither can
scarlet colour exist without extension; but this hinders not, but that they
are distinct ideas. Many ideas require others as necessary to their existence
or conception, which yet are very distinct ideas” (II.xiii.11).
In short, O’Connor erroneously claims that a patch of red is one
simple idea. Jolley accepts that claim and, in order to account for how it
is compounded, attributes relative simplicity to Locke. In doing so, Jolley
draws himself and Locke into problems. If Jolley had not accepted
O’Connor’s claim that a patch of red is one simple idea, then he would
not have to go through the pains of attributing relative simplicity to
Locke. He would rightly refuse to recognize O’Connor’s objection as a
real problem in the first place.3
3
Perhaps one who sympathizes with O’Connor might want to carry his objection
against Locke to a further level. “Let us agree,” the objector would say, “that a patch
of red is indeed a complex idea and that O’Connor made a mistake in thinking that
it is a simple idea. This, however, does not mean that there are simple ideas as Locke
claims. A patch of red,” he would add, “is composed of the simple idea of extension
plus that of the color red. Even though extension is taken as simple here, it is spatial-
ly compounded. As a matter of fact, “ he would notice, “any given portion of exten-
sion is spatially compounded. Extension, then, cannot be a simple idea since it is
always compounded. Therefore,” he would conclude, “O’Connor’s objection against
Locke still holds when applied to extension instead of the patch of red.” Locke pro-
vides us with an answer to this objection in an important footnote where he discuss-
es duration and extension. A simple idea is said to be uncompounded. However, the
term “composition” in this definition means “composition of different ideas in the
10 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
III. Absolute Simplicity and a Strong Version of Compositionalism
Upon reading Jolley’s discussion of O’Connor’s objection, one will
come to realize that Jolley only suggests that Locke might hold the thesis
of relative simplicity. Jolley does not explicitly assert that he is convinced
that Locke in fact holds that view. Based on this, one might accuse me of
arguing against a view to which Jolley is not even fully committed. It seems
as though I am imposing the thesis of relative simplicity on Jolley just
because he suggests its possibility. However, I believe that behind what
appears to be a mere suggestion is a full commitment on Jolley’s part to rel-
ative simplicity. This is the case because Jolley’s interpretation of other
issues in the Essay, particularly his account of compositionalism and
abstract ideas, shows an underlying assumption of relative simplicity.
Jolley’s interpretation of such issues cannot be maintained unless relative
simplicity is also maintained. Let us examine his account of such issues
and why his interpretation must be rejected by those who adopt the thesis
of absolute simplicity.
Let us start with the notion of compositionalism. Strong composition-
alism would maintain that all ideas are either simple or complex, with the
complex ideas composed of the simple ones. Jolley thinks that Locke held
this view in the first editions of the Essaybut then gave it up in the fourth
edition and adopted a weak form of compositionalism (45). As Jolley has it,
this form of weak compositionalism divides ideas into two categories: sim-
ple and non-simple. However, not all non-simple ideas are complex, as is the
mind, and not a composition of the same kind in a thing whose essence consists
in having parts of the same kind, where you can never come to a part entirely
exempted from this composition” (Locke II.xv.9). The idea of extension does not
contain any idea of a different kind in it; it only has parts that are of the same
kind. Extension, then, is not compounded in Locke’s signification of the word. It
is, therefore, a simple idea. Even if we consider a portion of extension to be com-
plex, it does not follow that there are no simples. In this case, Locke says that the
least portion of extension that we could have a clear and distinct idea of would be
considered the simple out of which our idea of a bigger portion of extension would
be made. Even though extension can indeed be conceptually subdivided indefi-
nitely, it cannot, according to Locke, be so subdivided when it comes to perception
(Locke II.xv.9).
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 11
case in strong compositionalism. Non-simple ideas can be classified as com-
plex ideas, abstract ideas, or relations. This type of compositionalism, how-
ever, can only be held if one holds the thesis of relative simplicity. This
view is not compatible with the thesis of absolute simplicity because, given
that only the simples are indivisible, any non-simple is necessarily divisible
and therefore complex. Absolute simplicity necessarily takes any non-sim-
ple as complex. Thus, we cannot hold absolute simplicity and weak com-
positionalism at the same time. The adoption of absolute simplicity forces
us to reject weak compositionalism. We must, then, adopt strong composi-
tionalism if we are to hold absolute simplicity at all as I have argued.
Let us now consider Jolley’s account of abstract ideas. Jolley claims
that “ideas at the highest level of abstraction have something in common
with simple ideas; they are free from complexity—they are not strictly
compounded from simpler elements” (54). Jolley makes this assertion
because, according to him, Locke gives us two different accounts for how
abstract ideas are formed, the selective attention account and the elimina-
tion account. In Jolley’s view, the elimination account consists of consid-
ering a group of objects and forging an idea that represents an element that
is common among them. For example, from a lion, an elephant, and a
duck we can forge the abstract idea of animal. In this case, the abstract idea
is complex since it is “a product, of a number of various particular ideas”
(Jolley 51). The process of selective attention, according to him, consists of
focusing our attention on a particular characteristic of a thing, e.g., the
color white in a piece of chalk, and using that idea (that particular white)
as a representative for all similar ideas in other objects, e.g., the white in a
flower. When we use the white of the piece of chalk in this way, we create
an abstract idea. This shows why Jolley makes the assertion that some
abstract ideas lack complexity (white, for instance, is simple). If Jolley’s
account of what he calls “the selective attention account” is correct, then
it seems that some abstract ideas are in fact similar to simple ideas, at least
in the sense that they lack complexity. It seems that what determines the
classification of some ideas as abstract or simple is whether or not they are
functioning to represent other ideas. In this view, there is no difference of
the idea asidea. This, however, leads to some problems for those who hold
the absolute simplicity thesis. As we have seen, we cannot hold weak compo-
sitionalism if we hold absolute simplicity. Since all ideas must be either sim-
ple or complex, abstract ideas cannot be considered as a separate category
12 JOÃOPAULOALVESPEREIRA
besides these two. If they are to be considered as non-simple as Jolley
asserts, then they must necessarily be complex.
What about Jolley’s explanation of the selective attention account? Did
he not show us that some abstract ideas do in fact lack complexity when they
are forged by selective attention? Jolley might have overlooked something in
his interpretation of the selective attention account. I believe that selective
attention does not result in an abstract idea that lacks complexity. The end
product of this process is an abstract idea that is complex. Locke gives us an
important hint that this is the case right after his discussion of the selective
attention account. There, he considers whether or not animals abstract. He
says the following: “If it may be doubted, whether beasts compound and
enlarge their ideas that way, to any degree: This, I think, I may be positive in,
that the power of abstractingis not at all in them” (II.xi.10). Since this passage
follows his discussion of abstraction by selective attention, we must believe
the words “that way” refer to the operation of abstraction. This passage sug-
gests that abstraction either involves or is itself a type of enlarging and com-
pounding. This process, then, must produce complex ideas.
Unfortunately, Locke does not explicitly tell us how compounding
and enlarging are involved in this process. Nevertheless, there is certainly
one thing that differentiates simple ideas from abstract ones. An abstract
idea has a certain relation with the other ideas that it represents—namely,
the relation of being a representative of such ideas—while a simple idea
does not have that relation. What differentiates simple and abstract ideas,
then, is a relation. Thus, it seems reasonable to think that some abstract
ideas that seem to lack complexity are composed of at least two elements:
a simple idea plus a relation. This is a reasonable interpretation that is
compatible with both Locke’s tacit claim that abstraction involves com-
pounding (which makes abstract ideas complex) and with strong composi-
tionalism. Abstract ideas, then, are not considered as a separate class.
Instead, they are classified as complex ideas. However, it is unclear whether
Locke believed abstract ideas to have other elements besides the ones men-
tioned above.
IV. Conclusion
Jolley is correct in refuting Chappell’s claim that some complex ideas
come into our minds ready-made from sensation. As Jolley said, Locke is
ABSOLUTESIMPLICITYINLOCKE’STHEORYOFIDEAS 13
clear that only simple ideas are given in sensation and that the mind
imposes the unity of all complex ideas (46–7). For this reason, he should
change his approach for answering O’Connor’s objection. As we have
seen, adopting relative simplicity ultimately forces us to agree with
Chappell’s view. I have demonstrated how Jolley could adopt the thesis of
absolute simplicity and yet be able to respond to (or, rather, dismiss)
O’Connor’s objection against Locke. In doing so, however, Jolley would
have to revise his account of compositionalism and some aspects of his
account of abstraction. Nevertheless, this revision would be beneficial for
Jolley because it would allow his objections against Chappell and against
O’Connor to cohere. Ultimately, Jolley can either keep his views about
simple ideas, compositionalism, and abstraction as they are and accept
Chappell’s claim or revise some aspects of his views so he can properly
refute Chappell. Since certain passages in the Essaymake Chappell’s view
very unlikely, my recommendation is the adoption of absolute simplicity.
As we have seen, this adoption settles the controversy about Locke’s com-
mitment to compositionalism. Ultimately, this better understanding of the
nature of the simples leads us to a strong compositionalist interpretation
of the Essay.
Works Cited
Chappell, Vere. "Locke's Theory of Ideas." The Cambridge Companion
to Locke. Ed. Vere Chappell. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1994. 26–55.
Jolley, Nicholas. Locke: His Philosophical Thought. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Roger
Woolhouse. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.
O'Connor, D. J. John Locke. London: Penguin Books, 1952.