Aporia vol. 21 no. 2—2011
The Incoherence of William James’
Moral Philosophy
Jacob Perrin
In this paper, I contend that William James’ moral theory is incoher-
ent. James argues that we should permit a pluralism of values, viewing
all demands as prima facie goods. In order to construct the best moral
theory, he argues, that we should try to fulfill as many demands as pos-
sible, thus contributing to a richer and better moral universe. I argue that
if James maintains that all demands are equally good, then the demands of
opposing moral theories should be fulfilled just as much as the demands
required by James’ moral theory should be. James could introduce a stan-
dard of tolerance, requiring that all demands made must not conflict with
other existing demands. This would require all moral theories to be in-
clusive of each other, thus eliminating the apparent conflict between his
moral theory and other moral theories. However, a standard of tolerance
would require that the demands of James’ moral theory be reformulated so
that they do not conflict with other moral theories. I will begin by outlin-
ing James’ moral theory. I will then explain why it runs into the problem
of conflicting demands, and show that if my objection is correct, James’
argument is incoherent. Next, I will consider a response to the problem
of conflicting demands. This response will argue for the introduction of a
standard of tolerance that must be met in order for a demand to be good,
resolving the problem of conflicting demands. Finally, I will argue that
even if James introduces a standard of tolerance into his moral theory, his
position remains incoherent.
First, it is necessary to see exactly what James’ argument is and
what conclusions he draws from his argument. He begins by denying the
Jacob Perrin is a senior at Pepperdine University studying philosophy and pre-medi-
cine. He is particularly interested in moral philosophy. He plans to pursue a Masters
degree in bioethics before continuing on to medical school.
12 Jacob Perrin The incoherence of Williams James’ moral PhilosoPhy 13
existence, or at least the importance, of a moral metaphysical realm. He If it were found that all goods qua goods contained a
writes: common essence, then the amount of this essence in-
volved in any one good would show its rank in the scale
There is no such thing possible as an ethical philoso-
of goodness, and order could be quickly made; for this
phy dogmatically made up in advance. We all help to
essence would be the good upon which all thinkers were
determine the content of ethical philosophy so far as we
agreed, the relatively objective and universal good that
contribute to the race’s moral life. There can be no final
the philosopher seeks…no one of the measures that have
truth in ethics. (610-611)
been actually proposed has, however, given general satis-
faction. (620)
A moral realist would argue that there is a metaphysical realm which dic-
tates the rightness and wrongness of certain acts and functions as a final The goal of moral philosophy has been to find a common essence of this
moral truth. It is up to us, according to the absolutist, to discover the truths sort. According to James, Kant’s deontology, Bentham’s and Mill’s utili-
of this realm in hopes of implementing them into society. It is not, how- tarianism, and so forth, have all failed to provide a satisfactory theory of
ever, changing or alterable. James denies the existence of an unchanging, how to prioritize goods and thus have failed to direct us how best to act.
perfect, and distant moral realm, viewing ethics as ever-evolving. He goes James argues that some are not universally applicable, some are too vague,
on to say that, even if the metaphysical realm did exist, discerning it would some have obvious counter-objections, and so forth. Suffice it to say that
be impossible. If, for example, a God exists, “exactly what the thought of the theories that have attempted to find a common essence among goods
the infinite thinker may be is hidden from us” (628). At the very least, have all fallen short. In the absence of such a theory, James concludes that
James concludes, we should build our moral philosophy as if no knowl- “the essence of good is simply to satisfy demand,” and thus it should be our
edge of a metaphysical realm will provide us with a moral philosophy. If goal to satisfy as many demands as possible (621). He takes this to be the
no moral metaphysical realm exists, morality must be found in the physical inevitable conclusion of his argument, writing:
realm. James argues that morality is to be found in the desires and demands
Since everything which is demanded is by that fact a
of individuals. He writes:
good, must not the guiding principle for ethical philoso-
Goodness, badness, and obligation must be realized phy be simply to satisfy at all times as many demands as
somewhere in order to really exist…their only habit can we can?...the victory to be philosophically prayed for is
be a mind which feels them… moral relations have their that of the more inclusive side, of the side which even
status, in the beings consciousness. So far as he feels any- in the hour of triumph will to some degree do justice to
thing to be good, he makes it good. (614) the ideals in which the vanquished party’s interests lay…
invent some manner of realizing your own ideals which
If anything is good or bad, it is so because it is or is not desired by some
will also satisfy the alien demands,-that and that only is
individual. He continues to say, “The only force of appeal to us, which
the path of peace. (623)
either a living God or an abstract ideal order can wield, is found in the
A good moral theory, according to James, will be measured by the number
‘everlasting ruby vaults’ of our own human hearts, as they happen to beat
of demands it lets us satisfy; the more demands of moral agents it meets,
responsive and not irresponsive to the claim” (618). James attempts to shift
the more beneficial the theory is. Let us consider whether James’ theory is
philosophy’s focus from the abstract to the concrete. The good is to be
tenable. I will first consider an objection raised by Robert Talisse and Scott
found exclusively in the desires and demands of moral agents.Many things
Aikin. They note the existence of conflicting demands and ask whether
are demanded, however, but not all demands can be fulfilled. The task of
James’ theory can resolve the conflict. Talisse and Aikin argue that
the moral philosopher is to find a way to sort out the demands that should
be fulfilled from the demands that should be fulfilled in the ideal moral Certain kinds of ideals are such that to hold them is nec-
world. James presents an interesting dilemma. If we cannot glean morality essarily to judge certain other ideals to be immoral and
from some metaphysical realm, we must either find a common essence thus unworthy of realization. Not all moral conflict is
among goods, or satisfy as many demands as possible. He writes: due to an overall lack of resources or a general inability
to accommodate everyone. Some conflict is due to the
fact that some moral commitments involve a rejection of
14 Jacob Perrin The incoherence of William James’ moral PhilosoPhy 15
other moral commitments. (Talisse and Aikin 8) would, under his theory, be the most preferable. Insofar as his theory, if
believed by the most people, would fulfill a greater number of demands
For example, what happens when a group of white supremacists de-
than a theory with fewer supporters, it would be the better theory. How-
mand that African-Americans should not be allowed to vote and African-
ever, it seems that it would be difficult if not possible to sort through the
Americans argue that they should be allowed? Let us assume that there
varied and complex pluralism of moral theories and create a hierarchy of
are approximately an equal amount of individuals with each demand,
moral demands based solely on numbers. Furthermore, if James’ theory
or at the very least, that it is difficult to conclude which demand holds
did not comprise the majority, he would be morally obligated to subscribe
the majority. Each of these demands requires that someone else’s de-
to the prevailing moral theory. Let us assume then that no such priority
mand goes unmet. The demands cancel each other out, and although a
based on the number of people subscribing to a moral theory can be as-
good state of affairs would be achieved if either one is fulfilled, an equal
signed.
amount of bad, or at least privation of good, would also be gained due
Let us see if we can construct a response to the objection of con-
to the demand that goes unfulfilled. The objection is that James’ theory
flicting demands, thus avoiding the problem of incoherence. It seems
has no means by which to arbitrate between conflicting demands of this
that James would argue that we should alter our demands in order to
sort. This example provides an admittedly narrow consideration of the
accommodate the demands of others. In other words, to return to the
entire moral field. James would require us to survey the entire field and
example given above, the white supremacist could be permitted to hate
try to include as many demands as possible. However, this example does
the African-American, as long as the African-American is allowed to vote.
illustrate the point that, in situations where there is no conceivable way
Likewise, perhaps I should, as a deontologist, reformulate my views so
of deciding whether the fulfillment of one group’s demands is better than
that my demands are no longer in conflict with the demands of propo-
the fulfillment of another group’s demands, it is impossible under James’
nents of other moral theories. That way, everybody’s new demands are sat-
theory to arbitrate between conflicting demands.
isfied. This response seems to introduce a standard of tolerance to which
If this objection is correct, then I contend James’ theory is incoher-
demands must adhere. This standard of tolerance would classify good
ent. To see the problem with James’ theory, we must begin by viewing the
demands as those that accommodate the demands of others. However,
moral claims of his theory as demands. It does not seem problematic to
as Talisse and Aikin put it, “this kind of account of the value of tolera-
view them this way. A moral theory makes demands on us to act in some
tion would have to identify the value of toleration outside of the existing
ways rather than others. To make a moral claim concerning X is to say:
economy of desires and demands,” so there is a problem, since “James is
“I demand that you do X.” It seems that any moral theory, insofar as it
committed to the thesis that there is no such thing as a good that is not
carries normative weight, makes such a demand of moral agents. Is James
in fact demanded by some person” (9). A restriction of demands based
justified in making the demand that I abide by his moral theory? It seems
upon some requirement of a standard of tolerance, it seems, would be
that he is not. If the above objection holds, then he has no means by
very un-Jamesian. To say that demands must meet a standard of tolerance
which to compel other moral philosophers to change their own view-
seems to go against a key tenant of James’ argument, which is that we
points. Other moral philosophers have created moral theories that make
should reject the goodness of demands based on a common essence and
demands which conflict with the demands of James’ theory. However,
treat all demands as equal. Now Ruth Anna Putnam argues that James
if all demands are equal, then the demands of other moral theories are
can “easily adopt a doctrine of tolerance. In the absence of an accessible
just as legitimate as the demands of James’ moral theory. Suppose, for
absolute truth, we must make our demands humble in nature” (Putnam
example, that I am a deontologist. It stands to reason that my conception
26). Henry Aiken writes that, for James, “tolerance is intrinsically valuable
of the perfect moral world would be considerably different from the con-
as well, that it is good, or right, per se to be tolerant” (Aiken 59). James
ception written into James’ moral theory, and that James’ conception and
himself writes that we must commit ourselves to “the well-known demo-
mine would conflict with each other. However, under James’ theory, all
cratic respect for the sacredness of individuality,” and to “the outward tol-
demands are equally legitimate; for example, my demand that the individ-
erance of whatever is not itself intolerant” (Putnam 26). The standard of
uals follow the rules of deontology is just as legitimate as James’ demand.
tolerance does provide a solution to the problem of conflicting demands,
James has no means by which to reconcile these conflicting views.
and with James’ respect for individual freedom and his value of pluralism,
It does seem that, if James’ theory comprised a majority, his view
perhaps a standard of tolerance would be the move he would make. Let
16 Jacob Perrin The incoherence of William James’ moral PhilosoPhy 17
us assume that James’ value of tolerance would prompt him to make an with the demanded world of the deontologist. It may be true that James
allowance for a standard of tolerance in his moral theory. and I would agree on many things, but at some point our paths would di-
The fact remains, though, that recourse to some metaphysical verge. His own theory cannot meet his own standard of tolerance. James’
conception of tolerance, goes against James’ rejection of the metaphysi- theory cannot include the demands of other moral philosophers. If all
cal realm. If tolerance is the elusive common essence that makes de- demands are good and tolerant demands are best, then James’ theory, as
mands good, then it seems that we get a completely different argument well as all other moral theories, should be discarded. At best, James could
from James. Good demands become those that can accommodate other argue for some sort of synthesis of all existing moral theories. He could
demands, whereas bad demands are those that call for the restriction of attempt to take the tolerant aspects of his theory and the tolerant aspects
the demands of others. Although I think this revision of James’ ethics of all other theories and combine them to meet the demands of as many
undermines a central tenant of his argument, namely his rejection of a moral philosophers as possible. He has no grounds on which to reject the
common essence among goods, let us consider the revised Jamesian eth- demands of other moral philosophers. However, if he tries to accommo-
ics for the sake of the discussion. Perhaps James could argue that all (or date those demands of other moral philosophers, it seems that his theory
at least most) moral agents would agree that tolerance is desirable, and will crumble. It would lose any uniqueness whatsoever, no doubt lost to
thus a moral theory requiring a standard of tolerance would exist insofar vagueness and obscurity. James’ theory would no longer provide anything
as it satisfies a great number of demands. Thus, James’ escape from the of consequence to the moral philosophy discussion.
problem of conflicting demands is to require that demands not be intoler- Consider where this leaves us. If the objection about conflicting de-
ant of the demands of others. We will say that the demands that are able mands holds, then all demands are equally good if fulfilled, and we come
to tolerate the demands of others have met a standard of tolerance. This to an irreconcilable impasse when demands conflict with each other.
standard of tolerance will be the measure by which good demands are James cannot say with justification that his moral theory is better than its
separated from bad demands, and if tenable, will save James’ theory from competitors. And if we admit the introduction of a standard of tolerance
the problem of conflicting demands. I will now address a final objection that good demands must meet, the demands of James’ own theory do not
to James’ theory that grants the allowance of a standard of tolerance. pass his own test. His demands conflict with the demands of other pre-
It follows from the revised Jamesian ethics that, in order for a de- existing moral philosophies. If he tried to accommodate those demands,
mand to be legitimate, the demand has to meet the standard of tolerance. he would have to scrap his moral theory. In other words, if he treats all
However, the demands of James’ moral theory do not seem to be at all demands as equal and good, then he suggests that the demands of his
tolerant. James, for example, demands that we act as if the metaphysical moral philosophy are no better than the demands of other moral philoso-
realm does not exist, yet moral realists demand that we act as though the phies; and if he says that demands must be tolerant, then the demands of
metaphysical realm does exist, so it seems that James’ demand is intoler- his own moral theory fail to meet his own requirement in their conflict
ant of the moral realist’s demand. It seems that James’ moral theory as a with preexisting moral theories. I conclude that his theory is incoherent.
whole also falls victim to this objection. His moral theory demands that
I try to accommodate the demands of as many other individuals as I can.
But has he met this demand of his own moral theory in the creation of
his moral theory? James’ moral theory demands that the demands of the
utilitarian, the deontologist, the divine command theorist, and so on, go
unmet. Insofar as he demands adherence to his moral theory, and such
adherence would require one to not fulfill certain tenants of other moral
theories, James demands that the demands of other moral theories go
unmet. This seems to be deeply problematic. Let us imagine, once again,
that I am a deontologist. I argue that the perfect moral world is one in
which everyone lives their lives under the guidance of the categorical
imperative. James’ moral theory, if it is meaningfully different from deon-
tology (which I think it is), demands a world that stands in contradiction
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Aiken, Henry D. “William James as Moral and Social Philosopher.” Philo-
sophic Exchange 3 (1981): 55-68. Web.
Aikin, Scott F., and Robert B. Talisse. “Three Challenges to Jamesian Eth-
ics.” William James Studies 6 (2011): 3-9.
Gale, Richard M. “Comments on “Three Challenges to Jamesian Ethics”
William James Studies 6 (2011): 18-23.
James, William, and John J. McDermott. The Writings of William James:
a Comprehensive Edition, including an Annotated Bibliography Up-
dated through 1977. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1977. Print.
Putnam, Ruth Anna. “Response to Talisse and Aikin, “Three Challenges
to Jamesian Ethics” William James Studies 6 (2011): 24-27.
Putnam, Ruth Anna. “The Moral Life of a Pragmatist.” Identity, Character,
and Morality: Essays in Moral Psychology (1990): 67-89.
Putnam, Ruth Anna. “William James and Moral Objectivity.” William
James Studies. 1.1 (2007). Print.
Smith, Andrew F. “William James and the Politics of Moral Conflict.”
Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 1.12 (2004): 135-51.