Aporiavol. 17 no. 1—2007
Velleman and Parfit on Immoral Imprudence:
Up in Smoke?
GOVINDPERSAD
A
Tfirst blush, it might seem mysterious why anyone would begin smok-
ing tobacco. Smoking increases the risk of a litany of harms: from
cancer and heart disease, to reduced fitness and lung function, to impo-
tence and infertility (Musk 287–88). It is an expensive and often addictive
habit. It is clear why James I of England called smoking a
custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to
the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black, stinking
fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of
the pit that is bottomless. (Musk 288)
Despite the risks of smoking, however, I believe that some philoso-
phers overstate or misstate the case against it. In this essay, I will consider
two arguments offered by Derek Parfit and J. David Velleman—both hold
that smoking is immoral. Parfit argues that smoking is immoral because it
impermissibly restricts and harms one’s future selves (319–20). Velleman
argues that smoking, since it constitutes “trading one’s person in
exchange for benefits,” fails to meet the Kantian requirement to respect per-
sonhood (614). I will reconstruct these arguments and argue that they both
lead to similarly implausible and restrictive conclusions. While smoking is
often wrong, it is not wrong for the reasons Parfit and Velleman offer us.
Govind Persad is a student at Stanford University and graduated with a BS in
biological sciences and a BA in philosophy in June 2007. He plans to attendgrad-
uate school in philosophy. He thanks his professors John Perry, Michael Bratman,
and Agnieszka Jaworska for advice on earlier versions of this paper.
34 GOVINDPERSAD
I am not a smoker, nor do I think smoking is wise. Why, then, do I
choose to challenge these arguments against it? First, I find it interesting
that Parfit and Velleman, in broader works devoted to a wide range of
topics, both discuss smoking and take a similarly hard line against it.
Parfit, in Reasons and Persons, is presenting an innovative and well argued
version of utilitarianism, while Velleman’s “A Right of Self-Termination?”
makes an argument in the Kantian tradition against failing to respect
one’s personhood. I am curious about what feature of smoking makes it
so apparently deplorable that it brings two widely disparate theoretical
pictures into agreement.
Second, I think there may be more to smoking than akrasia, addic-
tion, willful ignorance, or even purely hedonistic pleasure. In some cases,
smoking constitutes a genuinely meaningful part of an individual’s per-
sonal aesthetic. Richard Klein, for example, suggests that the
moment of taking a cigarette allows one to open a parenthesis
in the time of ordinary experience, a space and a time of height-
ened attention . . . evoked through the ritual of fire, smoke,
cinder connecting to hand, lungs, breath, and mouth. (16)
Smoking can also express one’s identity or serve as a marker for values and
beliefs: Patricia Berman suggests that during the Bohemian period of the
late nineteenth century cigarettes “constituted an emblem of Bohemian or
Decadent culture” as well as performed numerous other important func-
tions of social significance (627). Smoking may produce some positive
health effects, such as greater resistance to neurodegenerative disease and
inhibition of acne and herpes blisters (Wolf et al. 108–9). Smoking also
provides self-medication benefits for some schizophrenics (Kumari,
Veena, and Postma 1021–34). These effects, while they do not outweigh
the harms of smoking in general, may do so for individuals who care espe-
cially about the benefits in question.
Ultimately, my aim is not to defend smoking, but rather to suggest
that Parfit’s and Velleman’s arguments do not make the best case against it.
(I think an appeal to the harms smoking inflicts on others, and the addic-
tive nature of cigarettes, might be more effective.) I will argue that both
Parfit’s and Velleman’s views, as stated, ask us to sacrifice too much of our
autonomy and our right to engage in risky projects and activities that
could lead to our being harmed or disabled; this theoretical flaw affects
VELLEMANANDPARFITONIMMORALIMPRUDENCE 35
not only their attitudes towards smoking, but their stances towards other,
more important human aims and goals. Ultimately, part of what it means
to be a person is to be free to autonomously choose projects, even when
they seem to be projects that will shorten our lives or curtail their quality.
I think that Parfit and Velleman underrate this feature of personhood in
their arguments and miss the mark as a result.
Velleman’s and Parfit’s Views
Velleman begins “A Right of Self-Termination?” with a vignette. This
vignette, which at first glance seems to be a bare moral intuition based on
personal experience, is used to argue that smoking is morally wrong:
Getting cancer changed my feelings about people who smoke.
I remember hearing a fellow philosopher expound, with a wave
of his cigarette, on his right to choose whether to live and die
smoking, or to quit and merely survive. I was just beginning a
year of chemotherapy, and mere survival sounded pretty good
to me. But I was the visiting speaker, and my hosts were
unaware of my diagnosis. Several of them lit up after dinner as
we listened to their colleague’s disquisition—they with amused
familiarity, I with an outrage that surprised even me and would
have baffled them, if I had dared to express it. (606)
Rather than bracketing his reaction as a personal outrage against smok-
ing, Velleman uses the story as a starting point for arguing that smoking
is universally immoral.
Velleman first reconstructs an argument for the permissibility of
smoking, representing the right to smoke as following from a proposed
right “to live and die in the light of . . . [one’s] own conclusions about why
[one’s] life is valuable and where its value lies” (Dworkin et al. 41–47;
Velleman 607). This right, Velleman thinks, relies on two premises:
(1) “A person has the right to make his own life shorter in
order to make it better—to make it shorter, that is, if doing so
is a necessary means or consequence of making it a better life
on the whole for him.” (607)
36 GOVINDPERSAD
(2) “There is a presumption in favor of deferring to a person’s
judgment on the subject of his own good.” (607)
Velleman then argues for another principle that potentially conflicts with
(1)—morality does not countenance actions that fail to respect the dignity
of persons. Furthermore, according to Velleman, what determines the dig-
nity of a person is not up to that person:
The dignity of a person is a value that differs in kind from his
interest. Unlike his interest, for example, his dignity is a value
on which his opinion carries no more weight than anyone
else’s. Because this value does not accrue to him, he is in no
better position to judge it than others. (611)
Since dignity is not a value about which agents have a say—it is not part of
an agent’s “own good”—premise (2) cannot come into action.
Velleman then makes the overly quick move that life-shortening in
general threatens the dignity of persons; thus, since principle (1) permits
life-shortening acts, it violates the maxim that we must respect the dignity
of persons. Since, on Velleman’s view, the dignity-of-persons principle is a
core moral principle on which all others—including (1)—depend, we must
abandon (1) because it undermines the principle on which it depends.
Lastly, since invoking a right to smoke depends in turn on (1) there is no
right to smoke:
I think Kant was right to say that trading one’s person in
exchange for benefits, or relief from harms, denigrates the value
of personhood, respect for which is a criterion of morality
(Kant would say, thecriterion). That’s why I think that smoking
is a vice—at least, when practiced for the reasons given by my
host. (Velleman 606)
On Velleman’s view, smoking is wrong because it fails to respect the uni-
versal value of personhood.
In contrast to Velleman’s vignette, Parfit begins his objection to
smoking with a much simpler and more abstract set of moves; he presents
a simple example:
Reconsider a boy who starts to smoke, knowing and hardly car-
ing that this may cause him to suffer greatly fifty years later.
VELLEMANANDPARFITONIMMORALIMPRUDENCE 37
This boy does not identify with his future self. His attitude
towards his future self is in some ways like his attitude to
other people. This analogy makes it easier to believe that his
act is morally wrong. We should claim that it is wrong to
impose on anyone, including such a future self, the risk of
such a death. (319–20)
Parfit’s evaluation of this situation relies on his metaphysics of personal
identity, which claims that a person’s life can be subdivided into the lives
of a set of successive selves. He states that seeing identity in this way “has
long seemed natural, when there is some marked weakening of psycho-
logical connectedness” (305, 319–20). Since Parfit believes that identity
consists in relations of psychological continuity and connectedness,
breakdowns in these relations over time will produce a successive-selves
model of identity: “After such a weakening, my future self will seem alien
to me now” (319–20).
When Parfit’s theory of identity is conjoined with the harm of smok-
ing, the conclusion that smoking is wrong seems to follow. Parfit suggests,
“We ought not to do to our future selves what it would be wrong to do to
other people” (320). If future selves really are like other persons, this prin-
ciple would be obvious: if my smoking affected you the way it affects me, it
would seem an impermissible imposition on you; no smoker should force
others to smoke. Ultimately on Parfit’s view, smoking is wrong because it
imposes impermissible risks on others. While for Velleman it does not mat-
ter whether dignity violations affect oneself or others, for Parfit one actually
becomes(in a sense) the “others” whom one should not negatively affect.
The Restriction of Autonomy
Smoking is an appealing example for Velleman’s and Parfit’s views
because it involves putting a dangerous substance into one’s body.
Smoking clearly shortens one’s life and does to oneself what no one ought
to impose on others. However, despite these life-shortening effects, many
smokers find smoking a valuable activity; thus, I suggest that we must take
the positive value that some smokers place on smoking into account as
well. Given some smokers’ desire to smoke and endorsement of smoking
as valuable, my first worry against Velleman’s and Parfit’s arguments is
38 GOVINDPERSAD
that they produce conclusions that are extremely restrictive of personal
autonomy. Although Parfit grants that his theory “reduces the claims of
personal autonomy” (320),I am concerned the effects will be far more dev-
astating to autonomy than he believes.
I want to motivate this worry by reference to a practical case. My
example will also be one of placing a harmful substance into one’s body;
however, rather than consider the consumption of tobacco, I want to con-
sider the consumption of food. Consuming food is, for most persons, a far
more central source of enjoyment than tobacco smoking. More than this,
food consumption is central to innumerable cultural and religious practices
and plays a crucial part in forming and cementing familial and interper-
sonal relations: consider the importance of dining with one’s family, or of
“breaking bread” together with one’s comrades. Food, in fact, along with
clothing and shelter, is considered one of the core human needs.
However, it is certainly true that what types of food one consumes
can affect the length of one’s life, most likely as much as smoking can if not
more so. As Sugimura states, “Three major factors for human carcinogen-
esis are cigarette smoking, infection and inflammation, and nutrition and
dietary carcinogens” (387). Furthermore, people do not need to engage in
extraordinarily risky practices in order to put themselves at risk of death:
the dietary carcinogens Sugimura discusses are not produced by esoteric
or exclusively harmful substances but by commonly consumed and even
staple food products such as grilled meat and fish, cured sausages, culti-
vated mushrooms, and citrus fruits. One might bite the bullet (or the tofu)
and give up these foods; however, it is probable that extreme caloric
restriction extends the length of human life (Roth et al. 305). Thus,
assuming caloric restriction does lengthen life, our choice not to consume a
reduced-calorie diet shortens our life spans and causes us to begin aging ear-
lier than we otherwise would.
Thus, Velleman’s argument seems to imply that choosing anything
other than essential nutrition, if it is likely to make your life shorter, shows
disrespect for the value of personhood. Parfit’s argument, meanwhile, sug-
gests that choosing to consume these foods runs the risk of imposing
harms on future selves, harms that we would not impose on others. Yet this
argument threatens to mandate a world in which persons live in bubbles,
eating calorie-restricted diets and refusing to participate in risky projects.
VELLEMANANDPARFITONIMMORALIMPRUDENCE 39
Worse, persons who provide foods that have life-shortening potential would
be engaging, on Velleman’s account, in an “immoral enterprise” (614).1
Velleman could attempt to distinguish smoking from eating by pro-
viding a definition of a sufficiently long life. On this view, smoking
would be immoral because it makes one’s life tooshort, but eating would
not be immoral because eating a normal diet does not decrease lifespan
below some arbitrary minimum, even though not eating a normal diet
would extend one’s life further. Just as Velleman might save his claim by
providing a definition of sufficiently long life, Parfit could try to provide
a definition of “acceptable risk,” where there are some risks that are accept-
able to impose on others (including future selves), while other risks may
not be imposed. Smoking, on my revision of Parfit’s view, could fall into
the latter category.
The above attempt to distinguish smoking from eating by appealing
to risk is too arbitrary. Different levels of risk may seem more acceptable to
some people than others, and risks may be taken on for different reasons.
It is possible that, for example, a sumo wrestler’s lifespan is shorter than a
smoker’s lifespan, and certainly shorter than an average office worker’s
lifespan. Yet telling a sumo wrestler that engaging in sumo wrestling is
wrong because the weight gain involved runs the risk of shortening his life-
span and thus violates his dignity seems wrong. And condemning a sumo
wrestler for inflicting health problems and excessive weight on a future self
seems equally wrong. A chef who prepares deadly Japanese puffer fish or a
deepwater diver should be equally free to pursue their projects. While my
argument is so far as intuition-based as Velleman’s, I suggest in the next
section that it has a theoretical basis. Furthermore, the idea of a minimally
acceptable life-length or an allowable risk amount seems contradictory to
the idea that persons have absolute dignity or that future selves may never
be treated in ways that we would not treat others.
In the end, both Parfit and Velleman seem committed to the view
that people who engage in lives that are riskier than the safest possible life
are doing something morally wrong. Such a normative claim strikes me as
both unattractive and incorrect. While having personhood implies the
1Note that some persons have thought this about fast food establishments—but Velleman’s view
seems to license this objection equally (if not more so) against Le Cirque or some other five-star
French restaurant serving bearnaise sauces
40 GOVINDPERSAD
possibility of losing it, a life lived merely with the aim of maximizing its
length and minimizing the risk of harm seems a poor one.
Theoretical Worries and Conclusions
More theoretical is the worry that the case of food consumption
shows that the move from larger theoretical principles (to which Parfit and
Velleman are committed) to condemnations of particular acts or act-classes
as immoral looks poorly founded. Let us say that we accept Velleman’s
claim that we are under a duty to respect the dignity of persons, whether in
our own person or in others. Equally imagine that we accept Parfit’s meta-
physics of identity where persons are successive selves over time. What I
suggest is that even if we acceptthese broad principles, they fail to justify the
moral restrictions that Parfit and Velleman think they do.
First, I believe that there is good reason to doubt Velleman’s claim
that a person does not have the right to make his own life shorter in order
to make it better. Velleman’s argument, as we have seen, does not merely
imply that one should not unduly endanger one’s life, but that one mustaim
to make one’s life—one’s “mere survival”—last as long as possible (606). But
why should we think that to lengthen one’s life, or to avoid shortening it, is
what preserving the dignity of persons consists in or requires?
Though Velleman claimed that “mere survival sounded pretty good
to [him],” it is not clear how he can get from this view to the view that
shortening one’s life is an insult to the dignity of persons. For those com-
mitted to a Kantian dignity-of-persons view, Richard Arneson’s view that
each person has “a moral duty to make something worthwhile of her life,
something good for herself and others,” (11) seems much more plausible
than Velleman’s. Arneson restates Joel Feinberg’s argument that the
Kantian stance Velleman embraces, seems to wrongly “make a fetish of
rational agency capacity” (14). And Jeff McMahan points to the problematic
results of Velleman’s position when he observes that Velleman’s Kantian
position on suicide also commits Velleman to rejecting anesthesia for pain
relief (459). In the same way, I argue that Velleman’s position on smoking
makes a fetish out of length of life, and that the result that his position
requires caloric-restriction diets is therefore unsurprising.
Similarly, why should we think that future selves can claim the same
sorts of rights against us that other persons standardly can? In particular,
VELLEMANANDPARFITONIMMORALIMPRUDENCE 41
why can these persons claim a right to have a healthy body held in reserve
for them? Parfit equivocates in two ways when he says, “Autonomy does not
include the right to impose upon oneself, for no good reason, great harm.
We ought to prevent anyone from doing to his future self what it would be
wrong to do to other people” (321). The two equivocations are about what
a “good reason” to impose great harm on oneself would be, and what sort
of “other people” the future self is morally analogous to. I will consider
them in reverse order, but I believe they are connected issues.
First, are future selves similar to existing persons, or are they other
futurepersons? If future selves are like currently existingpersons, we should
not impose any risks on them at all. Indeed, since I cannot permissibly
impose a risk of death on a present person, I might not even be permitted
to bring a future self into existence since that involves imposing a risk of
death on that self.2Parfit does specify that
our future selves are like future generations. We can affect them
for the worse, and since they do not now exist, they cannot
defend themselves. Like future generations, future selves have
novote, so their interests need to be specially protected. (319)
However, this introduces massive puzzles about what exactly future selves are
entitled to and whether harms (or risks of harms) to future selves should pre-
vent us on moral grounds from engaging in practices for which we dothink
that we have a good prima facie reason—for example, smoking as part of a
religious belief or ritual, or as part of a value system or aesthetic.
What obligations we owe future generations cannot be solved simply,
but I do not think that future selves and generations have “veto rights”
over what present selves and generations do. One might think, for exam-
ple, that we must not make future selves’ lives worse than nonexistence, or
worse than some baseline, which is compatible with coming into existence
in a smoker’s body. Determining what future selves would prefer their bod-
ies and histories to be like is also difficult. For these reasons, I am more
sympathetic to Feinberg’s suggestion, which Arneson reconstructs:
Suppose young adults would voluntarily choose to develop the
habit of smoking cigarettes, perhaps because the practice fits an
2But see David Benatar’s “Why It Is Better Never to Nome into Existence.” In this article, he falls
into this difficulty.
42 GOVINDPERSAD
ideal self-image. Suppose they know that older people tend to
disavow these youthful choices and regret the decision to start
smoking. The older people, compared with their younger
selves, give more weight to the value of good health than to
the value of stylish demeanor that conflicts with it. Still, the
youths’ voluntary enough choice now is to smoke. In these
circumstances, there is no soft paternalist rationale for prohi-
bition of smoking to save the future stages of these people from
their present voluntary choices—that would be usurping the
rightful role of the present self. In much the same way, people
today may voluntarily incur debts that their older selves will
regard as unwise, but the contract that gives rise to the debt is
not null and void on that account. Nor is there a soft paternal-
ist rationale for banning such contracts. (5–6)
This notion of the “rightful role of the present self” is what I think is miss-
ing in Parfit, and its absence makes his account of smoking similar to
Richard Posner’s claim that the young should often be morally required
to be fiduciaries of the interests of the old rather than pursuers of their
own interests (Aging and Old Age).
Finally, note that Parfit’s view may allow smoking in some cases
where most others would not: if the barriers between selves are not as high,
perhaps earlier selves may permissibly treat future selves unfairly to achieve
a greater sum total of happiness—for example, earlier selves may smoke if
they highly value smoking, it may bring them more pleasure than it would
cost their future selves in terms of pain. Parfit’s consequentialist argument
has difficulty explaining why this action is wrong—or worse, why a smoker
may not inflict smoking-related harms on entirely separate persons who
are not even future selves.3
Parfit’s argument against smoking comes very close to the true reasons
why smoking can be wrong. Smoking is wrong to the extent that it affects
real, existing persons in a way that is impermissible and rights-violating.
Whether this justifies prohibiting smoking is a further question: argu-
ments from the wrongness of inflicting “passive smoking” or environmental
smoke on others seem strongest, as opposed to the arguments that smokers
3 See Parfit 336–45 for a discussion of this issue.
VELLEMANANDPARFITONIMMORALIMPRUDENCE 43
require expensive health care (since this could equally be applied to sumo
wrestlers or French chefs).
Ultimately, Velleman’s and Parfit’s discussions of smoking suggest a
problem with many paternalistic arguments. Many self-affecting practices
seem distasteful or imprudent. However, many of these practices are valued
by their practitioners, and the same arguments that we raise against these
practices can equally be raised against more commonly performed ones.
This is not an argument for relativism or egoism: no person, no matter how
much she values smoking, may blow smoke in someone else’s face or steal
money in order to buy cigarettes. What I do ask for is a greater sensitivity
to morally condemning apparently imprudent self-affecting acts: taking a
position consistent with Parfit or Velleman requires not just condemning
ad hocthose acts others perform that we do not like seeing performed, but
also giving up many other practices that we think permissible and even
enjoyable. This suggests that we should think twice about whether moral-
ity can demand that we (not just “they” or “those wasteful smokers”) give
up so much autonomy.4
4 See also Seana Shiffrin’s “Paternalism, Unconscionability Doctrine, and Accomodation.”
Works Cited
Arneson, Richard. “Joel Feinberg and the Justification of Soft Paternalism.”
LegalTheory(2005):1–20.
Berman, Patricia. “Edvard Munch’s Self-Portrait with Cigarette: Smoking
and the Bohemian Persona.” The Art Bulletin75.4 (1993): 627–46.
Benatar, David. “Why It Is Better Never to Come into Existence.” American
Philosophical Quarterly34.4 (1997).
Dworkin, Ronald et al. “Assisted Suicide: The Philosophers’ Brief.” New
York Review of Books44 (1997): 41–47.
Klein, Richard. Cigarettes are Sublime. Durham: Duke UP, 1993.
Kumari, Veena and Peggy Postma. “Nicotine use in schizophrenia: The self-
medication hypotheses.” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 29.6
(2005): 1021–34.
McMahan, Jeff. The Ethics of Killing. New York: Oxford UP, 2001.
Musk, Arthur and Nicholas de Klerk. “History of Tobacco and Health.”
Respirology8 (2003): 286–90.
Parfit, Derek. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
Posner, Richard A. Aging and Old Age. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995.
Roth, George S. et al. “Caloric Restriction in Primates and Relevance to
Humans.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 928 (2001):
305–15.
Shiffrin, Seana. “Paternalism, Inconscionability Doctrine, and Accomodation.”
Philosophy & Public Affairs29 (2000): 205–50.
Sugimura,Takashi. “Nutrition and dietary carcinogens.” Carcinogenesis21.3
(2000): 387–95.
Velleman, J. David. “A Right of Self-Termination?” Ethics 109.3 (1999):
606–28.
Wolf, Ronni et al. “Smoking Can be Good for You.” Journal of Cosmetic
Dermatology3 (2004): 107–15.