Aporia vol. 19 no. 2—2009
Colorful Nothing:
Emptiness in the Madyamaka
Jimmy Pianka
The history of Buddhist philosophy is rich with debate and disagree-
ment, but this paper will focus on the particular school of thought
known as the Madhyamaka, or Middle Way view. This perspec-
tive, widely regarded as the apex of Buddhist metaphysics, charts a centrist
path between the extremes of material realism and nihilism. The work of
Nagarjuna, the Madhyamaka’s original architect, will be our primary source
for understanding the concept of emptiness, though a small amount of
Chandrakirti’s later commentary will provide additional support. Further
research was conducted through interviews at various monasteries in
Boudhanath, Nepal.
Our experience of the world is populated with a wide range of phe-
nomena—things like physical objects, forces, emotions, and people—all of
which appear to be substantial entities that exist in a very real sense. When
you eat your breakfast there is a thing that you consume, there is a thing
that consumes it, and then there is a process (another thing) that the food
undergoes during which it is transformed into more things still. The rela-
tionships between these things seem clear; we maintain rigid distinctions
between them, and we conceive of them as separate and independent phe-
nomena, each deserving its own ontological ground. This form of realism
is founded on the notion that all phenomena possess at their core some
essence—some immutable substance in which the phenomena’s intrinsic
identity is contained and which serves as the bearer of whatever attributes
the phenomena displays.
Jimmy Pianka is a senior majoring in Cognitive and Brain Science and Philosophy
at Tufts University. Last year he studied abroad in India and Nepal where he stud-
ied Buddhism and the politics of Tibetan exile. His interests include philosophy of
mind, philosophy of religion, and aesthetics.
Jimmy Pianka 34
This assumption, while seemingly commonsense, is understood in
Buddhist thought as the deepest and most tenacious delusion to plague
the human mind. It is a natural misconception—after all, the phenom-
ena we experience affect us in tangible ways: fire burns us when we touch
it, and a slab of wood taken to the face is going to raise a welt. The fact
that these experiences are so compelling, however, is a distraction from
the fact that neither the fire nor the wood exist as such. When we search
for their essence, we find that all phenomena—everything from galaxies to
atoms to people—are ultimately empty of the identities we ascribe to them.
Phenomena do not exist as independent entities that can be isolated and
understood sui generis, but rather as momentary forms whose existence
is entirely dependent on their relationships to other phenomena and the
conceptual labels we impute upon them.
At first glance the idea of emptiness as the ultimate nature of things
seems to invite charges of nihilism. It appears as if Buddhists dismiss the
whole of reality as mere illusion, as if it were some phantom masquerading
above a great void of nothingness that alone deserves our attention. On
face value this is a valid objection: if nothing truly exists, then what is this
all around me? There is clearly something here, so how can this something
arise from nothing? If the ultimate nature of things is emptiness, then how
are there things in the first place to possess this nature? These questions,
though sensible, arise from a misunderstanding of what is meant by emp-
tiness. Such a view treats emptiness itself as existing in terms of having
an essence, as if there were truly some void out there with the phenom-
enal world floating above it like mist. Admittedly it is easy to be so misled
when terms like “ultimate nature” are employed, but as we shall see, empti-
ness itself is just as empty as anything else. This is the cornerstone of the
Madhyamaka that allows it to maintain a balancing act between the two
extremes of material realism, the view that all phenomena exist inherently
and independently in and of themselves, and nihilism, the paradoxical
view that nothing exists. In the end we are left with a worldview in which
emptiness and form, truth and delusion, are as interdependent as the phe-
nomena they describe.
The Conventional Level
According to the Madhyamaka, there are two perspectives by which
we can understand phenomena: we can speak of them in terms of their
ultimate nature, or in terms of the conventional paradigm in which we live
our lives. These are known as the Two Truths; neither takes ontological
primacy over of the other—we are simply only aware of the conventional
Colorful nothing 35
level. In order to get a firm grasp on what is meant by emptiness, we will
first examine our conventions and identify the assumptions we make about
the nature of the world. Once this is established, we will be prepared to
dig deeper into their compositions and discover how said assumptions are
unfounded and how all phenomena are ultimately empty of inherent exis-
tence. Finally, we will turn to the emptiness of emptiness in order to rescue
us from nihilism and unite the Two Truths into the coherent centrist phi-
losophy known as the Middle Way.
Let us begin with a tree. When we look at a tree we are aware of its
many components—its branches, leaves, roots, and so forth—but in general
we conceptualize their unity as forming the basis for a greater object still:
an identity that begins at the furthest tips of its roots, continues to and
includes the outermost atoms of its entire surface, and penetrates com-
pletely through to its core. We can stand back, look at the structure as a
whole, and say, “that tree exists.” Now what do we mean when we use the
verb “to exist”? Jay Garfield, in his commentary on Nagarjuna’s Treatise
on the Middle Way, says that for a thing to exist in terms of our general
understanding of the word it must “have an essence discoverable upon
analysis, for it to be a substance independent of its attributes, [and] for its
identity to be self-determined by its essence” (315). To perceive phenom-
ena as existing in this way is to perceive them on the conventional level,
which is just one of the Two Truths. This is how the vast majority of us
spend our entire lives experiencing the world: we conceptualize it as being
composed of distinct, independent phenomena which can be isolated and
understood non-relationally as entities which exist inherently by their own
natures. We are aware of the various causes that bring these phenomena
about and the other phenomena with which they interact, but we perceive
sharp discriminatory borders between them and understand them as sepa-
rate and coherent concepts.
The Ultimate Level: A Physical Approach
We will examine a few of the arguments in the Madhyamaka tradi-
tion that demonstrate the emptiness of phenomena, but our first line of
attack should follow a more familiar course—namely, the science of physics
and its quest to unravel the material world. Since as early as the Greeks,
philosophy has been asking the basic questions of “What is reality?” in the
form of “What kind of stuff is it made out of?” Democritus and Leucippus
hypothesized that their atom was the most basic building block of real-
ity, and when our microscopes first caught sight of those little storms
we rejoiced in our discovery of the bricks-and-mortar of the universe. As we
36 Jimmy Pianka
probed deeper, however, we found atoms to be composed of even smaller
particles. Those particles turned out to yield the same curious results, and
now, despite the creation of increasingly powerful particle accelerators with
which scientists collide subatomic particles to search for smaller ones in
the wreckage, no substantial, indivisible object has been located that could
feasibly give matter its substance. Despite our effort, we have found only
a very colorful nothing.
That being said, our search’s failure by no means implies its futil-
ity. Perhaps we simply have further to dig. Matthieu Ricard, however, a
former physicist who is presently a monk and the French interpreter for
the Dalai Lama, presents a compelling argument as to why the existence of
an indivisible elementary particle is a logical absurdity. Suppose we have
such particles—how then do they combine to construct matter? It seems
safe to say that they can do so by either coming into direct contact with
one another or by maintaining their distance but relating in some other
way. If they touch, say the west side of one particle touches the east side
of the other, then we are dealing with objects which are still divisible into
constituent regions and are thus not elementary. As long as we conceive of
these particles in three dimensions we will always confront this problem.
To avoid this dilemma, these particles would have to exist in only
one dimension—thus they would be essentially mathematical points. This,
however, generates some problems: if the particles are points, then when
they touch the whole of one would be in contact with the whole of the
other, and thus both points would fuse into one. In such a model the con-
struction of any macroscopic structure is impossible—the whole universe
would be fused into a single point. If the particles did not touch, however,
and they were held together by something akin to the strong and weak
nuclear forces present in the current model of the atom, then the distance
between them becomes nonsensical. The locations of two non-touching,
one-dimensional points can only be related by positing at least another
dimension, and since points are merely theoretical constructs and occupy
no space at all, the distance between these two points would stretch into
infinity. Thus the relative scales of size we perceive in the world would lose
their foundations, and we could in theory have the entire universe situated
between two particles. Consequently, the entire concept of an elementary
particle is implausible and it is only through emptiness that forms can
exist (Ricard 4/16).
So let us return to our tree. We were last talking about its treeness:
the underlying essence that provides its identity as a particular tree. Where
then can we find this treeness? The intuitive answer is that it arises from
a synthesis of its parts, and not just from a few of them but from all of
them when they are combined and arranged in a particular way. Notice
Colorful nothing 37
now that we have already retreated inward to define the tree in terms of its
constituent components, which are, of course, just more objects that need
explaining. What then makes up their essences, and the essences of their
components? No matter how deeply we penetrate into the tree, everything
will stubbornly remain divisible into something smaller. If we look at the
wood we find that it breaks down into its cells, the cells break down into
mostly cellulose and other polymers, the cellulose is composed entirely of
glucose, and we know the story from here.
After such a descent, how can we say that there is any thing which
we can call a tree? We have found nothing of substance to bear this label.
Instead we have found an infinitely complex series of relationships and
interdependencies: the tree only exists in terms of its parts, those parts only
exist in terms of their parts, and so on ad infinitum. With no essence, we
can say that the tree does not exist inherently and is thus empty. This is
not to say that the tree does not exist at all, for clearly there is some form
to be perceived, but it is to say that the treeness of this form, its supposed
identity, is merely an arbitrary and artificial concept which we have foisted
upon it. The tree is empty of inherent existence or exists only in terms
of other things, which in Madhyamaka terms is to say that it is depend-
ently arisen. On a conventional level there is some form called a tree, but
any analytic search for the ultimate essence of that form will come back
empty-handed.
Of course, this same line of reasoning is not limited to trees but
applies to all phenomena—even immaterial things like emotions are empty
since they are never found without relations to other things. Anger requires
a subject, an object, the particular causes that brought it about, and the
mind that experiences it; there is no such thing as pure anger blazing some-
where on its own. The relationships that define phenomena are likewise
empty because they rely on the objects they relate to exist. No concrete
thing can ever be isolated and identified—we simply find particular causal
relationships and orientations which are by definition inextricably con-
nected to their particular causes and effects.
The Emptiness of Emptiness
So far we have ducked beneath the first extreme of material realism,
the belief that phenomena exist on their own by means of their essences,
but where does this leave us? To say that all phenomena are empty appears
to be asserting an intuitively unacceptable metaphysical nihilism. If noth-
ing exists, then what am I looking at? From what do all these wonderful
colors, sounds, and emotions I experience arise? In addition to the protests
38 Jimmy Pianka
of perception, emptiness as ultimate nature seems to generate some contra-
dictions. When we employ concepts like dependencies and relationships we
necessitate the existence of at least two characters—for after all, how would
nonexistent entities relate? How can a relationship exist if the objects it
connects do not exist to begin with? It seems that the concepts on which
emptiness depends are rooted in exactly that which it denies.
All of these questions, however sensible they may seem, are rooted in
the same faulty reasoning that Buddhism attempts to dissolve. The point is
not to treat emptiness as if it were a real void—some ultimate property that
defines the true essence of phenomena. If we do this we treat emptiness as
if it existed inherently, despite the fact that we cannot explain what this
would even mean, and we have simply substituted one essence for another.
When we searched for the essence of the tree and found nothing, it wasn’t
that we found a nothing—as if that nothing were a thing to be found—rather,
we simply did not find the tree; it was a wholly negative statement. The
tree’s emptiness is merely a concept used to characterize the dependent
nature of that tree, which means that we imputed it artificially in just the
same way we imputed the concept of the tree as a whole in the first place.
The tree has no inherent existence or essence, but this lack is not itself
a thing but simply the fact that the tree is only a convention; ‘without
essence’ is the way in which the tree exists.
That said, we can see how the tree’s emptiness is dependent on the
tree to exist and is thus empty itself! Furthermore, that emptiness is depen-
dent on the previous emptiness and is thus empty, and so on ad infinitum.
We are not talking about the disappearance of the phenomenal world but
rather the illusory manner in which it ultimately exists. As Garfield says in
his commentary, “Emptiness is not different from conventional reality—it
is the fact that conventional reality is conventional” (316). We cannot talk
about its ultimate nature because to use language is to employ concepts
and thus reify it, restricting ourselves to the conventional level. A true and
lasting understanding of the ultimate nature of phenomena can only be
realized experientially through meditation; this is by and large the purpose
of Buddhist spiritual practice.
Now we have reached the most essential concept of the Middle Way
and can understand what is meant by the phrase “Form is emptiness,
emptiness is form.” All phenomena are empty in that they do not exist
inherently but only in relation to other phenomena, but likewise empti-
ness can only be understood in relation to the particular phenomena it
describes. Thus we have avoided both extremes of essentialism and nihil-
ism and have arrived at a unity of the Two Truths. They are like the two
sides of a coin or a mobius strip, inseparable and inexplicable without the
other. The ultimate reality of things and our misperceptions are themselves
Colorful nothing 39
interdependent, and thus the nature of the world is both form and empti-
ness, being and nonbeing, inextricably intertwined.
Arguments for Emptiness in the Madhyamaka
Now that we’ve explored the heart of emptiness as a concept, we
will examine two ancillary arguments that the traditional authors of the
Madhyamaka employed to flesh out the worldview that emptiness implies.
It is prudent to cover the emptiness of emptiness quickly in order to
answer the questions that the notion initially prompts, but the following
arguments provide some of the finer details that may not have been imme-
diately obvious.
(1) The Refutation of Causation
The first argument we will examine is a reductio in which Nagarjuna,
the Madhyamaka’s central proponent, examines the process that underlies
causes and effects to demonstrate that here too no essence can be found.
The argument goes as follows: if a phenomenon comes into being, we can
say that its causes can have one of four possible relationships with their
effect:
1. The causes are the same as the phenomenon
(meaning they share the same essence).
2. The causes are different from the phenomenon.
3. The causes are both the same and different as the
phenomenon, or
4. The causes are neither the same nor different
than the phenomenon. (Donden 4/15)
We can immediately throw out the third possibility since it is a contradic-
tion. Likewise, we can discard the fourth, since it is either a contradiction
or is to be interpreted that the phenomenon is uncaused and springs into
being spontaneously. Additionally, we can eliminate the first possibility
since it is circular: if the causes of the phenomenon are identical to the
phenomenon itself, then the phenomenon would have had to have existed
prior to its own origination in order to bring itself about. This leaves us
with the model that most people take to be true: effects are brought about
through causes that are something other than themselves.
Nagarjuna, however, finds this option equally untenable. In the first
chapter of his Treatise on the Middle Way, he states the following:
40 Jimmy Pianka
[The] Essence of entities
Is not present in the conditions, etc….
If there is no essence,
There can be no otherness-essence. (I:3)
The first two lines point out that no essence can be satisfactorily located in
causes of phenomena. A burn is not present in fire and a welt is not pres-
ent in the slab of wood used to draw it out. The final two lines state that if
phenomena depend on their essences from other objects, and if no such es-
sence is present in those objects, then with no other place from which that
essence could come it follows that phenomena arise without an essence.
Having lost this basic ground of being, phenomena thereby lose the basis
by which they can be differentiated, and thus interdependent phenomena
are really just the same thing. Given this lack of difference, the notion of
obtaining an essence from another becomes absurd since there are no true
others from which this essence can be obtained. Therefore, it is impossible
for phenomena to come about by virtue of causes different than themselves
since this would result in an internal contradiction (Garfield 112).
Having refuted our model of causation, Nagarjuna is then forced to
explain, at least in some sense, the pattern of cause and effect we perceive
in the conventional world. In the end he does not do this in a way that we
would find fully satisfactory, but since he believes phenomena are ultimately
nonexistent to begin with, his obligations here are considerably lessened.
Rather than point to explicit causes that bring about their effects through
some enigmatic power, Nagarjuna instead appeals to the various conditions
that precede an effect to explain its appearance without ascribing them any
active involvement in the process. Thus, fertile soil, steady sunlight, and
a strong water supply are the conditions necessary for the growth of our
tree, but none of these are causes in the sense that they exert some power
to provoke the tree’s growth. Regularities and logical consistency are
what count (Garfield 103).
When pressed about why regularities exist at all, Madhyamaka phi-
losophers point out that regularities are only intelligible in reference to
larger regularities, and ultimately, the question is unanswerable: “The fact
of explanatorily useful regularities in nature is what makes explanation and
investigation possible in the first place and is not something itself that can
be explained. After all, there is only one universe, and truly singular phe-
nomena, on such a view, are inexplicable in principle” (Garfield 116). Thus
our final outlook is a typical Madhyamaka stance: on the conventional
level we may acceptably suppose active causal powers in the conditions nec-
essary for an effect, but ultimately no such powers exist—in the end our
Colorful nothing 41
explanations are grounded on a mythical system built from a consistency
we perceive in nature. Any attempt to decode this consistency will, if car-
ried out long enough, climb higher and higher into further consistencies
until it reaches the outer limits of the universe, at which point reason hits
a wall and becomes arbitrary.
(2) No Self
Finally, let us examine the famous Sevenfold Reasoning, an argu-
ment Chandrakirti introduced to demonstrate the absence of a true self
or ego. This argument is often seen with a chariot as its focus, but due
to the profundity of the point and its importance to Buddhism, we will
use the self instead. Additionally, although it logically follows that the self
would be included in our discussion of the emptiness of all phenomena, I
think it deserves some special treatment since there are few things which
to us seem more real. That said, the argument follows the basic format of
trying to isolate and identify the inherently existing person in relation to
the body and mind. When all the possibilities have been exhausted and
no such thing can be found, it follows that our self-perception as separate
and autonomous individuals is an illusion—we are just as interdependent
as anything else.
Assuming the self exists, Chandrakirti gives seven possibilities for its
relationship to its parts. These parts, hereafter unexplained, are typically
thought of as things like the body, the conscious will, memories, sets of
character traits, and so on, but they can include anything you would qualify
as an essential characteristic of your identity. These seven possibilities
are as follows:
1. The self is the same as or equal to its parts.
2. The self different than its parts.
3. The self is dependent on or exists by virtue of
its parts.
4. The self is based on or contained in its parts.
5. The parts are based on or contained in the self.
6. The self is the collection of its parts.
7. The self is the proper shape or arrangement of
its parts.
Many of these will be surprisingly easy to dismiss. First, if the self
were the same as its parts, then it would have to be either equal to them on
42 Jimmy Pianka
an individual basis or equal to them as a whole. If it were equal to them
each individually, then we would have to say that the self is many, which
is clearly not the case. Furthermore, if the self were equal to the sum of its
parts, then we would be forced to admit that we were someone new every
time we clipped our finger nails, ate a meal, or a had a new thought. This
isn’t what we have in mind when we think of a self—our notion of identity
is something that persists through change.
Next, the self cannot be something different from its parts because
then we would somehow be able to apprehend it as existing separately
from them. Theoretically we should be able to strip all the parts away and
still have the self, which is something we can’t do. Furthermore, the self
can’t depend on or exist by virtue of its parts because to do so would entail
difference, mutatis mutandis for the self being based on or contained in its
parts and the parts being based on or contained in the self. Additionally,
the self cannot be the collection of its parts because this would allow us
to dismantle it, rearrange the parts in any gruesome order, and still call it
the self. This makes no more sense than dismantling a chariot, tossing
its wheels and handlebars into a shiny brass heap, and then readying the
horses for a ride.
Finally, we are left with the possibility that the self is the proper shape
or arrangement of its parts. If the self can be reduced to a shape, then it is
a kind of physical thing—a precise arrangement of particles. This, however,
leaves out all the mental, non-physical components such as thoughts and
values. How are things with no shape to be included in this geometry?
If you’re a materialist and you believe that all of mind can be reduced
to neurons and electricity, then so far so good. But as we noted in the
first possibility, this option would freeze a wholly-physical self into some
fixed statue incapable of change: the loss or addition of even one particle
would constitute a change in identity. As we know, people gain and lose
weight, dye their hair, and get tattoos—not to mention the fact that our
bodies are constantly refreshing their cells. Even if you consider the shape
to be a pattern through which the parts are recycled—like the way a whirl-
pool exists in a stream despite never containing the same water for longer
than an instant—this pattern, being fixed by definition, would not be able
to account for the changes humans are known to undergo (Chandrakirti
83–84).
Furthermore, the notion of the self existing as something independent
is still untenable. Conventionally that whirlpool may persist, but ultimately
it’s just a concept available from our perspective, something totally depen-
dent on its components and circumstances for its existence—and beyond
that there isn’t even a stream. You as a persona exist in a conventional sense
like the tree, or the chair, or the candle, but if you start digging through
Colorful nothing 43
the layers in search of some gem that you could isolate and call yourself,
you’ll find only bridges arching out in all directions, interdependencies
that criss-cross to various forces and histories until your ego gets lost in
the webbing.
Works Cited
Chandrakirti. The Word of Chandra: The Necklace of Spotless Crystal. Ed.
Jamgon Mipham Rimpoche. Trans. Padmakara Translation Group.
Comp. Rafael Ortet. Shambhala Publications, 2005.
Conlon, Ryan. Personal Interview. 13 Apr. 2009.
Conlon, Ryan. Personal interview. 20 Apr. 2009.
Dalton, Catherine. Personal interview. 16 Apr. 2009.
deCharms, R. Christopher. Two Views of Mind Abhidharma and Brain
Science. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1998.
Donden, Jampa. Personal interview. 15 Apr. 2009.
———. Personal interview. 30 Apr. 2009.
———. “Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle Way.” Rangjung Yeshe Institute,
Boudhanath, 2009. 15–16
Hayward, Jeremy W. Gentle Bridges. Boston: Shambhala, 1992.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. Meditation on Emptiness. Boston: Wisdom Publications,
1996.
Jackson, Frank. “Knowledge: The Qualia Argument.” Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Ed. Martine Nida-Rümelin. 3 Sept. 2002.
Nagarjuna. The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way. Trans. Jay Garfield.
New York: Oxford UP, 1995.
———. Mulamadhyamakakarikas: Chapters I–XXI. Trans. Mark Siderits.
Price, Sean. Personal interview. 12 Apr. 2009.
Ricard, Matthieu. Personal Interview. 16 Apr. 2009.
———. Telephone Interview. 29 Apr. 2009.
Ricard, Matthieu, and Trinh Xuan Thuan. The Quantum and the Lotus: A
Journey to the Frontiers Where Science and Buddhism Meet. New York:
Three Rivers P, 2004.
Rigsel, Khen Rinpoche Lama Lhundrup. Personal interview. 27 Apr.
2009.
Rinpoche, Sogyal. Tibetan Book of Living and Dying. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco, 2002.
Tenzin, Khunzang. Personal interview. 26 Apr. 2009.
Gyatso, Tenzin. Consciousness at the Crossroads: Conversations with the
Dalai Lama on Brain Science and Buddhism. Ed. Zara Houshmand,
Robert B. Livingston, and B. Alan Wallace. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion
Publications, 1999.
Wallace, B. Alan. Choosing Reality a Buddhist View of Physics and the Mind.
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1996.
Watts, Alan W. Nature, Man and Woman. New York: Vintage, 1991.