AporiaVol. 14 number 1—2004
Reason to Revolt:
On Kantian Ethics and Revolution
KENNETHR. PIKE
n introducing Kant’s ethics in Practical Philosophy, Allen Wood writes,
I
“While confessing to a ‘wishful participation approaching enthusiasm’
for the French Revolution, Kant nevertheless sees revolutionary social
upheavals as both wrongful and counterproductive.”1This seems to be a
prevailing attitude among Kant scholars, despite the apparent contradic-
tion that, regardless of his confessed leanings, Kant held revolution and
rebellion to be unconditionally unjustifiable. It is extremely unlikely that
Kant was simply unaware of the paradox, especially considering the other
paradoxes he so meticulously addressed with regard to rebellion and revo-
lution. Could it be, as some have speculated, that Kant censored himself
for fear of governmental reprisal? Or was Kant so rationally detached from
his own philosophy that his near-enthusiasm represents a complete personal
disconnect? Fortunately, Kant himself did not leave this matter entirely to
speculation and conjecture. From the Formulation of Universal Law (FUL)
to the Formulation of the Kingdom of Ends (FKE) to Kant’s own com-
mentary on the matter of revolution, a number of clues indicate that
1Kant, xxx.
Kenneth Pike is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University. After gradu-
ation he will take his wife and daughter to Arizona, where he hopes to pursue a Master of
Fine Arts in creative writing. This essay won first place in the 2004 David H. Yarn
Philosophical Essay Competition.
2 KENNETHR. PIKE
Kant’s commitment to the immorality of revolution is not as absolute as
it is often portrayed.2
Revolution and the Formulation of Universal Law
The FUL states that one should “act only in accordance with that
maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a uni-
versal law.”3Our first concern, then, must be with the maxim which, when
acted upon, constitutes a revolutionary or rebellious act. It behooves us,
however, to take some peremptory action against potential objections by
beginning with an evaluation of revolutionary maxims according to the
FUL. This is due to a reportedly common misconception that the
Categorical Imperative (CI) in its various formulations is the be-all and
end-all of Kant’s moral theory. There are voluminous evaluations of vari-
ous maxims according to the FUL, due at least in part to its formulaic pres-
entation (as opposed to the arguably more nebulous FKE). But as Mark
Timmons notes:
In some cases a maxim will fail one of Kant’s tests (yielding a
negative verdict about the corresponding action) but the action
is not morally wrong (false negatives), and in other cases a
maxim that features a wrong action will pass Kant’s tests, yield-
ing a mistaken positive verdict about the act (false positives).4
Does this completely invalidate the FUL? No—but it serves as a stern warn-
ing to those who would build complete ethical systems from this single for-
mulation. Timmons goes on to suggest two caveats under which we must
operate in applying the FUL. First, we must apply the FHE to strip maxims
2 We shall assume for our purposes that the Formulation of Humanity as an End in Itself (FHE)—“So act
that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time
as an end, never merely as a means”—would be applied when evaluating howone may conduct a revolu-
tion, not ifone may do so (Ibid. 80).
3Kant 73.
4Timmons 171.
ONKANTIANETHICSANDREVOLUTION 3
down to their morally relevant components before applying the FUL, elim-
inating false positives.5 Second, we must consider the FUL evaluation a
sort of “decision procedure” not for declaring maxims moral but for weed-
ing out clearly immoral maxims, thus accounting for false negatives.6So we
will analyze revolutionary maxims according to the FUL only in order to
establish the possibility that they are moral.
With that in mind, we are in need of a maxim for analysis. The sim-
plest revolutionary maxim, it would seem, is “I will overthrow the current
government.” Can this maxim be universalized? According to Christine
Korsgaard, maxims may be tested against the FUL in two ways:
A maxim which cannot even be conceived as a universal law
without contradiction is in violation of a strict and perfect
duty, one which assigns us a particular action or omission. A
maxim which cannot be willed as universal law without con-
tradicting the will is in violation of a broad and imperfect duty,
one which assigns us an end, but does not tell us what or how
much we should do towards it.7
It should be obvious that our initial maxim cannot survive such tests, but
lest we be accused of deciding the matter by fiat, we shall elaborate. Very
simply, if everyone were always committed to overthrowing the current
government, no one would form governments and there would be none
to overthrow; this contradiction reveals our initial maxim to violate a per-
fect duty. Furthermore, it seems contradictory to will that any govern-
ment—even one that benefits or protects oneself—should be overthrown;
our initial maxim also violates an imperfect duty.
5Ibid. 174.
6Ibid. Whether or not the scholars here consulted have the “correct” interpretation is an argument
beyond the scope of this paper; thus for our purposes we shall rely upon their reasoning without further
discussion.
7Korsgaard 135.
4 KENNETHR. PIKE
Can we save our maxim with any morally relevant additions? Indeed,
Kant himself gives us a model for doing so. He writes, “There is a categor-
ical imperative, Obey the authority who has power over you (in whatever
does not conflict with inner morality).”8Now if we consider the addition
in parentheses a sort of caveat, then it is an exception to the statement and
the statement becomes a hypothetical imperative rather than a categorical
imperative. So, integral to the imperative, inner morality must be morally
relevant in the case of obeying authority. Can the same be said for maxims?
If we revise our initial maxim accordingly, we get: “I will overthrow the cur-
rent government when it is evil.” Nothing here may be stripped away
through application of the FHE, so the maxim stands as containing only
morally relevant information.
Using Kant’s definition of evil (“an object of aversion in the eyes of
everyone”), this maxim is also easily universalized.9If everyone always acted
to overthrow an evil government, by definition the only government left
would be good government; there is no contradiction in conception. And
again by definition, eliminating an object everyone is averse to cannot pos-
sibly be a contradiction of will. For even if evil people desire an evil gov-
ernment, as Jeffrie Murphy notes, a difference exists between what one
wills and what one desires:
[It may be argued that] no man desires to suffer punishment for
wrongdoing. Thus, since I would not desire to suffer punish-
ment for wrongdoing, I would be willing inconsistently and
thus immorally if I ever willed punishment for others. . . . [But
it follows from Kant that] a rational man can willhis own pun-
ishment even if he does not desireit.10
Similarly, it may be argued that evil people desire an evil government, but
that does not mean they necessarily will such a government. So in the case
8Kant 505.
9Ibid. 189.
10 Murphy 163, emphasis added.
ONKANTIANETHICSANDREVOLUTION 5
of revolution and the FUL, it would appear Korsgaard’s suggestion that
“Kant’s conclusions can be blocked by his own procedures” was an accurate
one; our revised maxim may be successfully universalized.11
Revolution in the Kingdom of Ends
That our revised maxim, “I will overthrow the current government
when it is evil,” may be universalized, however, indicates only that it might
be moral and that it bears further consideration. Now we must consider
the FKE, which demands that we “act in accordance with the maxims of a
member giving universal laws for a merely possible kingdom of ends.”12
This formulation of the CI presents some interesting issues not revealed by
the FUL. Specifically, it does not lend itself to formulaically generating a
system of ethics from raw maxims. Neither does it offer any concrete
boundaries for such a system. Instead the FKE presents an “admittedly
ideal” description of a society in which the CI is practiced.13
Though it may not be immediately obvious, this creates a problem for
our revised maxim. For so long as it is first “asked what is laid down as right
(where principles stand firm a priori and no empiricist can bungle them),
then the idea of the social contract would remain in its incontestable
authority . . . as a rational principle for appraising any public rightful con-
stitution.”14 In other words, once created from rational principles, gov-
ernment authority is absolute and inviolable. If we lived in a kingdom of
ends—and according to the FKE, we should act as though we do—then of
course the government would be founded upon rational principles. But
does this invalidate our maxim? Or would our maxim be acceptable as
merely moot due to the impossibility of an evil government in the king-
dom of ends?
11Korsgaard 134.
12Kant 88.
13Ibid. 83.
14Ibid. 301.
6 KENNETHR. PIKE
Of course, it is a logical impossibility (and thus irrational) for any gov-
ernment, no matter how despotic, to tolerate revolution. “For, that the
constitution should contain a law . . . authorizing the overthrow of the
existing constitution, from which all particular laws proceed . . . is an obvi-
ous contradiction.”15 But there is a much larger concern here. Not only
must the government not provide for its own overthrow, but it would seem
that we ourselves must not act upon our revolutionary maxim by virtue of
the fact that in an ideal world it would clearly be either immoral or impos-
sible to do so.
Or so Kant’s critics might have us think. For at this point they can lay
out the heavy philosophic artillery—whether through casuistry or conse-
quentialism, it is easy to assail a position as idealistic as this. Even
Korsgaard concludes that “morality itself sometimes allows or even requires
us to do something that from an ideal perspective is wrong.”16 But in the
very act of introducing empirical examples, Kant’s critics lose their ability
to meaningfully discuss pure reason of any kind, including the CI and its
formulations. Pure reason is transformed into practical reason at such a
juncture. This is not to say that the CI is “impractical” and devoid of mean-
ing in applied ethics—only that “reason would overstep all its bounds if it
took upon itself to explain how pure reason can be practical.”17
But now we have digressed somewhat and perhaps muddied the
waters with sundry objections to what initially seemed a straightforward
matter: whether Kant’s ethics and his attitude concerning revolution can
be rationally reconciled. The idealism, practicality, moral content, and true
meaning of the CI all appear relevant, on one hand, to our discussion.
After all, no summary of Kant’s ethics could be considered complete with-
out an explanation of the all-pervasive CI—and an ethics devoid of all prac-
ticality would of course be moot. On the other hand, Kant makes it very
clear that in the instant the ideal meets the practical, “explanation ceases”
15Ibid.
16Korsgaard 135.
17Kant 104.
ONKANTIANETHICSANDREVOLUTION 7
and “nothing is left but defense.”18This seems to preclude further (explana-
tory) discussion.
A brief recap may help us to connect these loose ends and return to
the primary issue. We have established the possibility that a revolutionary
maxim, “I will overthrow the current government when it is evil,” is a
moral maxim. We have also established that in the ideal society, the king-
dom of ends, our maxim would be either immoral or impossible to act
upon. We have also seen that Kant advocated both acting as if the ideal
were present and acting according to practicality, both empirical and oth-
erwise. But at this point the ability to explain is lost and one must rely
solely upon defense. In order to proceed, then, we must turn to a slightly
more practical discussion of revolution, in which we will see just how
defensible our maxim is.
Revolution, Empirically Speaking
We shall begin with the evaluation of Kant scholar Wolfgang
Schwarz, who argues that revolution is indeed morally wrong without
regard to the circumstances. According to Schwarz:
What about a state which inflicts injustice, wrong, and even
arbitrary death on its citizens? Can it enjoy such far-reaching
inviolability? If we speak of a state as an institution capable of
externally and internally protecting its citizens generally and of
uniting them, the constitutive civil foundation is accepted as in
force and forbids any reversal. Where a state exists, in whatever
crude beginnings or degenerate forms, its laws, and they alone,
determine all relations of public life. Otherwise there is anar-
chy, and nobody will find himself concerned with the problem
of a right of resistance.19
18 Ibid. 105.
19Schwarz 129.
8 KENNETHR. PIKE
Were it not for Kant’s comment concerning the French Revolution, this
interpretation (and others like it) might pass wholly unquestioned.
Certainly it seems to echo the comments Kant himself made. For when he
speaks of revolution, Kant does not seem the least bit concerned with
oppressive governments or what have you. At one point he goes so far as
to claim that “if a people now subject to a certain actual legislation were to
judge that in all probability this is detrimental to its happiness, what is to
be done about it? Should the people not resist it? . . . On the part of the
people, there is nothing to be done about it but to obey.”20
Note a few key differences, however. Nowhere in his evaluation does
Schwarz mention happiness, which seems to be the key “deprivation” in
Kant’s statement. Conversely, Kant does not mention injustices while
Schwarz focuses on them. We have already seen that Kant’s kingdom of
ends supposes a government with something much more refined than
“crude beginnings.” Furthermore, if we look to a footnote on the same
page, we see a most interesting caveat. Kant notes that “if [an unjust law
were passed] it is easily seen that a whole people could not agree to a law of
this kind, and it is authorized at least to make representations against it.”21
“At least” is an interesting choice of words. That Kant did not instead
write “at most” is particularly revealing, especially considering the other-
wise limiting nature of his discussion. Of course, “at least” gives only a low-
side boundary; where one meets the upper limit is simply not stated. In
addition, this footnote specifically references an unfair taxation situation
resulting in an imbalance of responsibility; how much more reason to “at
least make representations” against unjust laws resulting in, for instance,
arbitrary deprivation of life? The longer one dwells on the possibilities
introduced by this particular footnote, the more one must wonder why
Kant has been interpreted so narrowly with regard to the matter of revolu-
tion. But if we are to admit any sort of consistency between Kant’s feelings
for the French Revolution and his philosophy as written, it seems probable
20 Kant 297.
21 Ibid.
ONKANTIANETHICSANDREVOLUTION 9
that the list of acceptable actions against unjust governments includes not
just the making of representations, but, where necessary, revolution.
But we cannot leave the argument there. For Kant clearly does con-
demn revolution in enough cases that his focus is on the immorality of
revolt while he merely footnotes the possibility of a moral revolution.
Kant’s declaration that people have no right to revolt specifies that they
ought not revolt against that which appears detrimental to their happiness.
For of happiness Kant states, “One cannot . . . act on determinate princi-
ples for the sake of being happy, but only on empirical counsels.”22As the
empirical counsels that deal with happiness cannot trump the “legislative
will and . . . freedom” from which the legal state originates, revolution can-
not be justified by a people seeking some greater happiness—but it can be
justified by a people seeking justice and rationality.23
Might not a revolution involve both motivations? Quite possibly—
indeed, from a historical perspective, while revolutions are instigated by
idealists, they are won or lost depending on which side appears to promise
the greater happiness to the masses. Clearly, arbitrary executions, bur-
densome taxation, or any other unjust governmental practice will naturally
contribute to general unhappiness. Consequently, it might under certain
circumstances be difficult or even impossible to determine whether a revo-
lution were moral, because it appears that the morality of a revolution
depends upon its being conducted for the right reasons. But this should
sound familiar to any student of Kantian ethics. For one of Kant’s most
basic statements regarding morality is that moral actions must be per-
formed “not from inclination but from duty.”24 An act done from incli-
nation and not from duty is, for Kant, immoral. In short, one’sintentions
make all the difference in any given situation—even revolution.
22Ibid. 71.
23Schwarz 129.
24Kant 53.
10 KENNETHR. PIKE
Conclusion
Clearly Kant spoke in support of revolution in some form. What
more faithful interpretation of a system of ethics than the one given by its
author? We may only speculate as to why Kant chose the focus he did,
devoting significantly more time to the evils of revolution than to its pos-
sible moral justifications. Certainly the political climate during his lifetime
would not have favored a more revolutionary attitude. And there is always
the concern that license given to those who are justified is often claimed
by those who are not. But further discussion must be relegated to histo-
rians or, perhaps, the realm of speculation; we simply have no knowledge
of Kant’s motivation in this matter. But whatever his reasons, where Kant
chose to focus his discussion of revolution does not justify overlooking
those passages in which he indicates the possibility of a moral revolution
and hints at the requirements for such a movement. For once such passages
have been acknowledged, it becomes easier to see how the CI in all its for-
mulations supports everything Kant said (instead of merely what he wrote).
In retrospect, this should not be surprising. Of the Kantian ideal, the
kingdom of ends, Korsgaard writes, “it is not feasible always to live up to
this ideal, and where the attempt to live up to it would make you a tool of
evil, you should not do so.”25 This is exactly in line with Kant’s assertion
that we ought to obey authority insofar as it does not conflict with moral-
ity. It seems clear that failing to rise against an evil government that enacts
unjust laws would make one a tool of evil. In the end, it becomes clear that
one of Kant’s most basic principles held the answer all along.
“Understanding, wit, judgment . . . are undoubtedly good and desirable
for many purposes, but they can also be extremely evil and harmful if the
will which is to make use of these gifts of nature . . . is not good.”26Once
one has established a good will, actions and consequences fail to be in
themselves morally significant—their moral content is provided by the good
25Korsgaard 153.
26Kant 49.
ONKANTIANETHICSANDREVOLUTION 11
will, not the other way around. Had Kant’s participation in the French
Revolution ever graduated beyond the category of “wishful,” perhaps he
would have made this more explicit with regard to the subject. But as it is,
an appeal to the text shows us that for Kant, anything, revolution included,
is justified when it springs from a good will.
References
Kant, Immanuel. Practical Philosophy. Trans. by Mary J. Gregor. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Korsgaard, Christine. “The Right to Lie: Kant on Dealing with Evil.”
Philosophy & Public Affairs15.4 (1986): 325–349.
Murphy, Jeffrie G. “Kalin on the Categorical Imperative.” Ethics 79.2
(1969): 163–164.
Schwarz, Wolfgang. “The Right of Resistance.” Ethics 74.2 (1964):
126–134.
Timmons, Mark. Moral Theory: An Introduction.Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers, 2002.