Aporia, Vol.11, No. 1, 1992
The SuBjEcnvE Universality of Kant's
Aesthetic Judgment
Dennis Potter
... a judgment of taste involves the consciousness that all
interest is kept out of it, it must also involve a claim to being
valid for everyone, but without having a universality based on
concepts. In other words, a judgment of taste must involve a
claim to subjective universality. {Critique ofJ udgment 54; my
emphasis)
How is this subjective universality possible? Indeed, the phrase itself
seems to be an oxymoron. We often use "subjective" to refer to
something that is person-relative while we use "universal" to refer to
something that holds for everyone. In fact, as this paper will show, this very
same prima facie tension exists in Kant's notion of subjective universality. The
whole problem seems to be derivable from Kant's notion of "disinterest," and if
left alone, without further elucidation, could almost be taken as a reductio ad
absurdum of Kant's position. But Kant does not leave it alone. Kant's notion of
"free play" between the faculties of understanding and imagination provides a
context in which subjective universality is possible under certain conditions
which will be shown herein. Furthermore, the notion of subjective universality
and its cohesive factor of free play between the faculties has some interesting
implications which result in at least one possible criticism.
To begin, we will see how the problem of subjective universality
develops from Kant's notion of disinterest. Kant states that both the liking of
the agreeable and of the good involve interest, the agreeable insofar as its
gratification depends on the existence of an object( 47-48) and the good insofar as
its gratification depends on a concept (48-49). However, the liking involved in
the judgment of taste must be disinterested, or independent of an object or a
concept (51). He apparently makes his initial case for this through mere
examples (52).
More importantly, Kant seems to be anticipating the concept of
universality in making this assertion, since if a judgment is disinterested, it
could be impartial and universal. Nevertheless, there are other ways to attain
universality. With objective experience it is attained through the understanding's
necessary legislation over the imagination which yields the universal categories.
In practical reason, when the faculty of reason legislates, it yields universal
maxims on the basis of non-contradiction. However, with regard to both of these
previous faculties, judgments of pleasure are not universal: liking the agreeable
is person-relative (e.g. liking a particular kind of food). And the liking of the
good is certainly not universal, since if it was, we would not need the
48 Dennis Potter
Categorical Imperative.^ Moreover, though the judgment of the good may be
universal, such a judgment" would not have been made in reference to pleasure
and hence would not be a judgment of taste" (63). Thus, though legislation
yields universality in certain respects, it falls short of universality with regard to
judgments of pleasure. Since imagination cannot attain the universality of a
judgment of taste through legislation over the other faculties, it must find
another way. This way is found in disinterestedness. Kant states; "All interest
ruins a judgment of taste and deprives it of its impartiality" (68). So if a
judgment is partial in any way, it cannot be connected to a "universally valid
liking" (69). And this means that in order to be universal it must be impartial,
or disinterested.
Not only is disinterest necessary for a judgment to be universal, but it
would seem that a disinterested judgment would be non-conceptual (subjective).
Indeed, if a judgment is conceptual then it is necessarily linked to the object of
contemplation over which the concept legislates: "In order to consider something
good, I must always know what sort of thing the object is [meant] to be, i.e., I
must have a concept of it" (49). And if a judgment is dependent on the object of
contemplation (to know what sort of thing it is and what it is meant to ac
complish), then it holds an interest in the existence of the object. This is be
cause to allow our judgment to be dependent on what sort of thing the object is
supposed to be is to exhibit interest in the existence (i.e. the purpose and the
role played) of the object (49). Thus, since interest is a result of a judgment
being conceptual, it follows that a disinterested judgment must be non-
conceptual: "A judgment of taste determines the object, independently of
concepts, with regard to liking and the predicate of beauty"( 63).
Now if a judgment of taste is non-conceptual then there is no way that
one could determine rules that could govern us in our judgments of the beautiful
(59). And it follows from this that there is nothing essential to the object in
judgments of the beautiful. Instead there must be something essential in the
observer or judge; Kant admits this as well (54). But it follows from these
considerations that if beauty is dependent on the observer's ability to view it as
such and it is not dependent on the observer's capacity to legislate into the object
(Kant's usual source of universality), then judgments of taste seem to be rel
ative only to the observer and thus not universal.
However, this tension in the idea of subjective universality is not as
problematic as it would seem. Kant solves this problem with a different kind of
universality (85). This universality has its necessity grounded in something
other than the legislation that results in the universality of the categories. As
seen above, it is in disinterestedness and the free play that takes the place of
legislation that a judgment of taste has necessity, and is thus universal.
First, we must understand what Kant means by "free play." Since
imagination does not legislate per se, it is either involved in a non-conceptual
interaction with the understanding or in a conceptual interaction that lacks the
determinacy of legislation. And since the interaction "cannot arise from con
cepts"( 54), it must be a non-conceptual interaction. This interaction between the
^In Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals Kant says that because God
desires to do that which is good He does not need any imperative (41).
Kant's Aesthetic Judgment 49
faculties is thus free "because no determinate concept restricts them to a
particular rule of cognition" (62). And if the interaction is not determined by a
necessary (lawful) conceptu^ framework then it seems appropriate that this
movement be compared to "play" as opposed to the orderliness implied by
"work." So the interaction is a free play which results in the harmony that is the
basis of the judgment of beauty. But now we must answer the question of how
the harmony could be universal.
Now, we know from the Critique of Pure Reason that the cognitive
faculties spoken of are universal in cognition—every rational being employs
them. Thus, it follows that what can be done by them in any given situation
can, by virtue of their very nature, be done by any rational being. Hence, every
ration^ being is capable of participating in the free play. This may be part of
what Kant means when he asserts that we have a "common sense" that is pre
supposed by subjective universality (89). And indeed there seems to be textual
support for such a conclusion. For one, if it is the faculties that provide for the
"common" element in "common sense," this would seem to explain the
connection that Kant makes between "common sense" and universal communi-
cability. Surely if we all have the same faculties then we could have the same
concepts as well (e.g. the categories). And a common conceptual basis provides
for a universal communicability. Moreover, the free play of the faculties could
provide for the subjective element( sense, or feeling) that Kant insists is a part of
aesthetic judgment Indeed, the non-conceptual free play can only yield a "mental
state [which] must be a feeling" (62). With the faculties being "common" and
the free play yielding a sense, the free play of the faculties is the "common
sense" necessarily presupposed f(x univer^ subjectivity.
Not only can all rational beings experience this free play, but it seems
that free play necessarily yields judgments of taste. Kant does not ever explicitly
state this; instead he seems to suggest that the harmony that results from free
play is the pre-requisite for the experience of higher pleasure (62). Now if it were
not only a pre-requisite but if the judgment of beauty and the state of free play
were logicdly interdependent, then it would follow from this, and the fact that
anyone can have the experience of free play, that any possible judgment of taste
is possible for every rational being (85).
Insofar as the faculties are universal and free play necessarily yields a
judgment of beauty, then it would follow that all people could see the beauty
that objects could cause in us. And insofar as free play is different from
cognition in that concepts are not involved, then the judgments that result from
free play are subjective and not objective (i.e. not legislated by the faculty of
understanding). Thus, it would follow that subjective universdity is not only
entirely possible but "obligatory" given this interpretation of the system in
which K^t is working.
However, this conclusion is dependent on the conditions delineated
above: (i) that the faculties are universd (an idea which is central to Kant's
project) and (ii) that free play necessarily yields judgments of beauty. Of course,
it is the latter that is controversial. However, if judgments of beauty were not a
necessary result of free play, then it would follow that these judgments would
entail no necessity whatsoever and would lose their universal status. Kant's
subjective universahty rests on these two conditions.
50 Dennis Potter
Before we go on to explwe the implications of this interpretation of the
nature of aesthetic judgments let us acknowledge a possible objection to this line
of thought. One might argue that unless we assume that the mental state of the
fiee play results for everyone in all the same conditions then our conditions (i)
and (ii) above do not yield universal results and thus cannot explain the
subjective universality. To illustrate, it does not seem to be a universal
judgment when two people (person "A" and person "B")l ook at one painting by
Picasso and disagree about whether it is b^utiful. On Kant's account these
persons have the same faculties and yet under the same external conditions they
make conflicting aesthetic judgments. Moreover, A might very well be in the
mental state we have called free play—a state which is causing her to make her
judgment of beauty. Thus both conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied and yet it does
not seem that the judgment is a universal one.
The point of the criticism seems to be that if the conditions under
which a subject experiences the free play are subjective ones, then the judgment
cannot be universd. However, I do not think that this criticism is completely
valid. By analogy, it must also say that if everyone did not subscribe to the law
of excluded middle under the same conditions, then it must not be universal.
However, this is an equivocation of "universal" and "universally accepted under
certain conditions." If psychologism is false and logic is normative, then it
would seem that it is universal even if someone dissents from it The aesthetic
judgment could be similarly universal. Suppose we modify the above example.
Perhaps B knows that Picasso declared himself to be a communist and so she—
being a loyal American—has a pre-disposition against Picasso. As long as she
knows that the painting in front of her is by Picasso she may not be able to
view it disinterestedly. But if she lacks this disinterest, according to Kant, then
she cannot have the free play of the faculties. Thus she does not see the picture
as beautiful. However, if she were capable of viewing the painting
disinterestedly, then her faculties would be involved in the free play which
necessarily yields the judgment of beauty. Therefore, A's contention that the
painting is beautiful is universal because anyone who allows herself to see it
disinterestedly will make a similar judgment.
Now, it is widely recognized that there are some interesting
implications of Kant's Critique of Judgment in general. Nevertheless, on this
interpretation and with regard to the discussion of the notion of subjective
universality the implications are even more interesting. The first implication is
that the idea of free play and its connecting role in attaining subjective
universality provides a reason why the faculties might be able to interact in the
first place (88).^ Indeed, though the idea of the interaction of the faculties is not
contradictory, there would seem to be an explanation lacking as to how these
different faculties get together in the fmst place—why do they interact at all? In
the case that the faculties of understanding and imagination can exhibit an a
priori but non-conceptual harmony which results spontaneously, then their
legislative interaction could be explained. Moreover, if this harmony is a priori
and yet non-conceptual it shows how the universality of the concepts is not just
^This p>omt is similar to the idea that common sense provides for the possibility of
universal communicability.
Kant's Aesthetic Judgment 51
a linguistic phenomenon—the pre-Iinguistic rational being could theoretically
make judgments of taste, though she may be unable to express them.
Another implication of the above interpretation is that a judgment of
beauty can be made about any object if it is seen disinterestedly. If a judgment of
beauty could be made with regard to one set of things and not another, then there
must be something about that set of things that warrants such a judgment that is
not present in the others. But a conceptualization of this element would
constitute a rule by which we could know if something is beautiful or not And
this strictly contradicts the implications of the fact that judgments of taste are
non-conceptual (59). So, it follows that everything could yield judgments of
beauty. Though Kant does not seem to not assent to this position explicitly,^ he
does suggest it when he says: "About any presentation I can at least say that
there is a possibility for it( as a cognition) to be connected with a pleasure"( 85).
This evokes a possible criticism of Kant in that if everything can
arouse a judgment of the beautiful, then the term "beauty" loses its meaning
since nothing differentiates it from everything else. Yet, perhaps those who hold
this criticism miss the point; they do not recognize that on this account
judgments of beauty are definite results of the inner state of a judge. Judgments
of beauty would become judgments that say more about the person who makes
them than about the object judged. Hence, they retain a definite quality which
differentiates them from other judgments.
The last implication of this interpretation seems to be the most
important for Kant. It is with the Critique of Judgment that Kant successfully
bridges the gap between our experience and the world of the Ding-an-sich. On
my interpretation, the experience of the free play does not involve a conceptual
legislation. And since it is the legislation of the faculties that provides for the
subjectively active element of our experience, its absence leaves the possibility
open for a more passive content in the aesthetic experience. A passive content,
not being of the subject, must be from an external source—i.e. the Ding-an-sich.
Thus, the experiencing subject is brought closer to the supersensible world. That
Kant was attempting to close the gap between the two worlds with his third
critique is obvious (among other places) in the second introduction: "judgment
makes possible the transition from the domain of the concept of nature [the
world of our experience] to that of the concept of freedom [the wwld of theDiwg-
an-sicHT (37).
Tension in the notion of subjective universality and its implications is
soluble through understanding it in the context of Kant's overall project. With
the purpose of showing the possibility of a priori judgments of taste, Kant
sought a universality of a different nature than that found in his other Critiques.
And since the means of attaining universality, i.e. the free play of the faculties
from which necessarily results a judgment of beauty, makes the basis of such
judgments non-conceptual, it follows that this peculiar universality can be none
other than subjective in nature. Finally, subjective universality not only
^Indeed, there are places where Kant almost seems to deny this position implicitly
(e.g. see p. 53), but I believe that there are ways to interpret such passages congru-
ently with my interpretation of Kant's general position with regard to subjective imi-
versality.
52 Dennis Potter
provides for an a priori harmony of the faculties and a bridging of the gap
between the two worlds, but the considerations from which it is derived imply
that a universal judgment of beauty is possible with regard to any object, as long
as the observCT can be disinterested.
BIBUOGRAPHY
Kant,I mmanuel. Critique ofJ udgment Trans. Werner S. Pluhar. Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Co., 1987.
.F undamental Principles of The Metaphysic of Morals Trans. T.K. Abbott.
Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1987.