Aporia Vol. 6, 1996
Continuing Plantinga's Critique of Naturalism:
The Uncertainty of Reliable
Probability Judgments
Matthew Power
In chapter 12 of Warrant and Proper Function, Alvin Plantinga argues
against the possibility of metaphysical naturalism and the neo-Darwinian
theory of biological evolution (hereafter denoted by N&E). Fitst, he
argues that the probability that the state of affaits N&E obtains is low.
Second, he asserts that belief in N&E is irrational, even if N&E turns
out to be true.' These two arguments are very significant philosophi
cally, particularly in view of the claim made by many evolutionary
scientists that "evolution is a proven fact." The aim of this essay will not
be to tecapitulate or evaluate Plantinga's arguments in any detailed way.
Rather, 1 will focus on extending Plantinga's line of reasoning a step
further. 1 will argue, primarily, that the defender of N&E is irrational
not only in believing that N&E is true with certainty, but even in
merely believing that N&E has a probability just high enough to make
it plausible. In arguing this, 1 will show that the N&E defender is not
even justified in making accurate probability judgments. Finally, from
Plantinga's arguments and my extension of them, 1 will conclude that
the only way to rationally believe N&E is to affirm theism, which then
precludes N&E from consideration as a viable worldview.
Matthew is a senior majoring in philosophy and religion at the University of
Iowa. He will begin graduate work in philosophy this fall also at the University of Iowa.
'It is important to note that Plantinga does not argue that the irration
ality of believing N&E is entailed by the low probability of N&E. Rather,
Plantinga claims that such a belief is irrational because it is self-defeating—
belief in N&E ends up undercutting itself because if N&E is true, then the
epistemological basis for believing it to be true is undermined.
52 MATTHEW POWER
Plantinga argues for the irrationality of believing N&E by unpacking
the content of that conjunction and clarifying exactly what it entails.
Although 1 have greatly simplified the argument, Plantinga's reasoning
for the irrationality of believing N&E proceeds as follows. If N&E is the
case, then the belief-forming mechanisms that human beings currently
possess came to be as the result of an eons-long process of intellectually
unguided, biological evolution that was driven by random genetic muta
tions and natural selection. Therefore, the particular belief-forming
mechanisms that humans possess today must have given our ancestors
survival value, since they lived in a physical environment whose general
inhospitability made necessary characteristics conducive to survival.
However, if our belief-forming mechanisms were generated by a process
in which beliefs promoting the survival of living organisms were of
paramount importance, then there is no particular reason to think that
such mechanisms provide us with mostly true beliefs. Rather, any number
of nonveridical sets of beliefs could have brought about the physical
floutishing of the primates which would evolve eventually into human
beings. In fact, certain sets of beliefs containing mostly false beliefs
might be even better at promoting human survival and subsequent
evolution than other sets of beliefs that are composed mostly of true
beliefs. Therefore, a believer in N&E can have no undefeatable, rational
grounds for belief in N&E, since in believing that N&E is true, one
accepts that this very belief( that N&E is true) was formed as the result
of a belief-forming mechanism which may or may not produce mostly
true beliefs. Says Plantinga, "one who accepts N&E (and is apptised of
the present argument) has a defeater for N&E,a defeater that cannot be
defeated by an ultimately undefeated defeater. And isn't it irrational to
accept a belief for which you know you have an ultimately undefeated
defeater?" (235).
Despite Plantinga's argument, the N&E believer is unlikely to give
up belief in N&E so easily. Rather, one might attempt to defend N&E
against Plantinga's criticism by restating the N&E claim in a weaker
fashion. For example, one could repudiate the strong claim that N&E is
certain and replace it with the assertion that N&E merely is probable
enough to be plausible. Or, one might argue that although the probability
of N&E is low, nonetheless, it is higher than the probability of Theism
and Evolution (T&E) or Theism and Creationism (T&C). However,
plantinga's critique of naturalism 53
neither of these strategies will succeed.^ As I will argue, a Plantinga-style
argument can be constructed to demonstrate that a retreat to such
reduced claims will not help justify belief in N&.E.
First of all, if naturalism and theism are the philosophically signif
icant alternatives in metaphysics, then those two alternatives are both
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive. Thus, if it can be shown that
belief in one of them is irrational, then belief in the other alternative is
rational by default. One way to discover if a belief is rational is to
determine the probability of that belief. Yet ascertaining the proba
bility of naturalism is extremely problematic, for the following reason.
Since some form of evolutionary theory is entailed hy naturalism,' then
if naturalism is true, then the ability to calculate probabilities must have
evolved. So, to claim that atheistic evolution is probable (even mini
mally probable), or even to claim that such an evolutionary theory can
be assigned an accurate probability, is to claim implicitly that the canons
of probability themselves resulted from evolutionary processes. And
these processes, it must further be noted, acted primarily to effect the
survival of various organisms and were not aimed at a state of affairs in
which organisms could obtain verisimilitudinous beliefs. Therefore, if
our ability to form probabilities as well as our beliefs about probabilities
(which include beliefs about the probability of evolution itself) are the
result of belief-forming mechanisms that are known to facilitate survival,
but that may or may not produce beliefs that correspond to reality, then
any epistemic posture is undermined which claims to know anything
about the probability of N&E, whether high, low, or somewhere in
between. In other words, just as we cannot expect the evolutionary
mechanism to produce true beliefs (as Plantinga argues), neither can we
expect it to produce the ability for reliable probability judgments, and
hence probably true beliefs.
^T&E and T&.C are mentioned because they are the only two altemative
possibilities to N&E. N&C,o f course, is an incoherent set.
'Naturalism per se does not entail evolution, since it is logically possible
that a universe exists without any biological organisms in it. Given that human
beings do exist, though, if God does not exist, then we must posit some theory
of nontheistic evolution to account for our existence, since creation and evolu
tion (broadly construed) are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive theories
of human origins.
54 MATTHEW POWER
At this point, the defender of N&E may want to counter the above
argument with any of several objections. First, one might object that the
ability to make accurate probability judgments is invaluable to the sur
vival of any biological organism that has evolved to the intellectual
level where such judgments are possible. For example, suppose that
Caveman Ugg (a quasi-humanoid sort of guy) sees not too far in front of
him a saber-toothed tiger snarling at him. In a mostly unconscious and
instinctive way, Ugg quickly "estimates" the probabilities of the success
of vatious means of survival available to him in his current situation.
He could hurl his spear at the tiger, climb the nearest tree, stand still,
turn and run away, play dead, jump into a nearby lake, roll up in a ball,
smile and say "Niiiice kitty!" (if his verbal skills are that advanced), and
so forth. If Ugg takes the course of action that is most likely to secure his
continued existence, then he will probably survive this little incident. On
the other hand, if he does something really stupid, then most likely he will
become the main course for a large, mean, sharp-clawed, hungry Stone-
Age mammal. Therefore, says the N&E believer, it is false that having
true beliefs about probabilities is not connected causally to survival.
This objection does have some bite. However, it is far from clear
that being proficient at making the sort of lightning-speed probability
judgments that are necessary for survival in dark, steamy, primeval jungles
or barren, frozen. Neolithic wastelands entails being similarly proficient
when dealing with highly complex probability calculations (such as
those about evolution) in the posh, (mostly) nonthreatening environ
ments of modern-day universities. Clearly, the circumstances in which
probability judgments are made, as well as the specific types of probability
judgments being made, change the relationship between the making of
such judgments and the survival of the judgment maker. For example,
the miscalculation of a probability judgment that a certain chemical
element will decay within the next four months usually has little or no
bearing upon anyone's physical survival. Therefore, humans could have
evolved in such a way that their "gut-reaction" probability assessments
are generally accurate, but that nonetheless, many of their higher-level
probability calculations are often flawed in some significant way. The
N&E defender might object to this suggestion by asserting that such
flaws could be uncovered by engaging in careful scrutiny of the reason
ing involved in making complex probability judgments. However, such
an envisaged scenario presupposes again that our ability to engage in
PLANTINOA'S CRITIQUE OF NATURALISM 55
reflexive analysis of our own patterns of thought is not hopelessly faulty
because of some quirk in the evolutionary process.''
A second objection that might be advanced against my argument
is the following. Suppose that the property of possessing belief-forming
mechanisms that are aimed at truth' is a property that came to be mani
fested in certain organisms. And P(B) did not come about because it gave
those organisms survival value directly. Rather, because P(B) is associated
genetically with various other biological characteristics that do have
survival value, this property just happened to be "along for the ride."
This objection has very little explanatory power. Granting that
such may have been the case does not answer a fundamental question
that the N&E defender needs to grapple with, namely, why does P(B)
exist at all? The N&E defender already cannot maintain that P(B) itself
facilitates the survival of organisms which are on the evolutionary path
towards humanhood. Therefore, apart from an Intelligent Designer who
created beings with the kinds of belief-forming mechanisms that hook
up those beings to their environment in a veridical way, there is no
particular reason to believe that P(B) would have evolved simply as a
result of random genetic mutations and natural selection. Also, the
objector needs to explain why P(B) would be associated with other
genetic properties that promote survival in the first place. Did this
association occur at random? If so, were the odds realistic that such
an association might eventually occur? And if not, what nonchance
mechanisms resulted in such an association? Answers to such questions
need to be forthcoming if this objection is to have any force.
One might argue, as a third objection, that it simply seems strange
that one is forced to conclude from the mere plausibility of N&E that
one is unwarranted in making any sort of probability claim concerning
atheistic evolution, even a claim of relatively low probability. (For, if my
argument is sound, then an inescapable agnosticism is entailed regarding
the probability of neo-Darwinian evolution.) But this objection simply
amounts to a protestation of the oddity of a situation in which beings
who evolved cannot demonstrate successfully the probability of their
■'This assertion also fails to explain how the very intellectual capacity of
self-reflexivity of thought could have emerged through an evolutionary process.
'Hereafter, this property will he referred to as P(B).
56 MATTHEW POWER
own evolution. Strange as such a state of affairs may be, if it is the case,
then it just happens to be a weird sort of case.
The reason why attempts to make probability calculations about
N&E are futile can be stated another way. Initially, our epistemological
situation is one in which we do not know whether or not naturalism is
true. At this point, any attempt to give probabilistic arguments that
purport to make plausible the truth of naturalism can be circumvented
easily by the wise Plantingian. One need not waste time countering
such reasoning with traditional theistic or antinaturalistic arguments.
Rather, the Plantingian can undercut any such argument in much the
same way that he or she undercuts arguments for the high probability of
N&E. Recall that if naturalism is true, then our belief-forming mecha
nisms (which include the ability to form valid logical arguments) are
the result of an essentially random evolutionary process. Consequently,
we cannot know (for the same reasons given earlier) whether such
mechanisms produce true beliefs, or whether they might generate false
beliefs that are better somehow at facilitating our survival. But this
uncertainty entails that the reliability is highly suspect of any proba
bilistic reasoning process that leads to the belief that naturalism even is
plausible. Thus, the mere belief that naturalism is plausible turns out to
be self-referentially destructive—by its very nature, such a belief cannot
possess any undefeatable, rational justification. Hence, the belief that
naturalism has even a low probability is undermined in such a way as to
make it irrational. Consequently, to concern oneself with the probabil
ity of the truth of naturalism would be like worrying about the proba
bility that Santa will be able to fit down one's chimney, after one had
concluded that no logically unproblematic basis exists for believing in
such a jolly old gift-bearer.®
To summarize the above arguments, the N&E defender who argues
even for a respectable probability for N&E is in a real bind because
given its very content, belief in the plausibility of N&E undercuts
^Of course, the Santa scenario is not completely analogous to the situation
that obtains with regard to neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory. In the former
case, adults know that there is no good evidence that Santa Claus exists. In the
latter case, there does exist some empirical evidence which can be plausibly
interpreted as indicating that some sort of biological evolution has occurred.
plantinga's critique of naturalism 57
any attempt to determine its own probability. This, then, reinforces
Plantinga's argument that we cannot reliably accept the truth of N&E.
And these arguments lead to a more startling conclusion. If still it is
maintained that theism and naturalism are the only two serious contenders
in metaphysics, then it turns out that only in the context of theism is it
even possible to fulfill the necessary conditions for determining the
probability of N&E. That is, paradoxically, only if theism is true do
the epistemological conditions obtain which would allow one to calcu
late N&E's probability. And of course if theism is true, then N&E is
false. So it turns out that the existence of God is a necessary condition
for the epistemological state of affairs to obtain in which a person can
justifiably determine the probability of an explanatory hypotheses
describing how atheistic evolution occurred. Therefore, determining
the likelihood of any evolutionary theory can be done with warrant only
if theistic evolution is assumed—and if theistic evolution is true, then of
course the probability of evolution having occurred is one, merely
because God willed that evolution occur.^
In conclusion, it turns out that because of what is entailed by the
very concept of N&E, one cannot justifiably assign N&E a respectable
probability,® or any probability for that matter. This fact is just as serious
a problem for the N&E defender as is Plantinga's conclusion that it is
irrational to believe N&E. Also, the N&E defender faces the even
more unwelcome conclusion of jettisoning the belief in naturalism
(and replacing it with belief in theism) to be epistemically justified in
engaging in any sort of probability assessment. So, based on the preced-
ing argument, the only option that the N&E defender has is to give
up the epistemic right to make probability judgments. Such a choice
probably will be as unsavory for the N&E defender as giving up belief
in N&E itself.
^The argument just summarized also rebuts the potential "reduced claim"
mentioned earlier of the N&E defender—namely, that even if the probability
of N&E is very low, still it is higher than the probability of T&E or T&C.
Clearly, if T is a necessary condition for determining justifiably the probahility
of any proposition, then hoth T&E and T&C are more probable than N&E.
«Of course, it may still tum out to be the case that N&E is highly pro
bable (if it is true, for example)—it's just that we have no legitimate way of
establishing such a probability.
Works Cited
Plantinga, Alvin Warrant and Proper Funcaon New York Oxford UP,
1993