Aporia, Vol.11, No. 1, 1992
PHILOSOPHY AND ETHICS IN DESCARTES
Scott Pugh
In Part Three of his Discourse on Method, Descartes attempts to separate
philosophy from ethics. He asserts that the end of philosophy is the at
tainment of truth, while the end of ethics is happiness and resoluteness in
action (31). This separation also establishes a hierarchical relationship between
these two realms: philosophy is primary, ethics is secondary, or "provisional"
(31). Thus, it is not surprising that when Descartes analyzes the ego he
characterizes it as a "substance whose whole essence or nature is solely to think
..."(36).
Yet certain passages in Cartesian texts suggest a reversal of the posi
tions Descartes assigns to philosophy and ethics; that is, he seems to imply that
ethics is in fact prior to philosophy. In this paper I will trace Descartes' partition
of philosophy and ethics and his characterization of the ego as a "thinking thing"
{Meditations 82) which follows from it. I will also argue that Descartes
unwittingly suggests a critique of this project which reveals both the priority of
ethics to metaphysical and scientific philosophy and the incompleteness of his
analysis of the ego as purely a thinking thing.
In Part Two of the Discourse, Descartes sets forth the method he
devised to direct his reason. After explaining the four rules of his method he says
that, above all, he will use it to "[seek] after truth in the sciences ..."( 29). He
goes on to state that when the method is used properly, "there can be nothing
too remote to be reached in the end or too well hidden to be discovered"( 29). The
purpose of the method, then, is to govern one's reason in the search for truth,
especially in the sciences. However, as Descartes points out, all of the sciences
must ultimately be derived from philosophy (30-31). It followed for Descartes
that his first task must be to "try to establish some certain principles in
philosophy" (31); that is, to secure some philosophical truths on which to
ground the scientific truths discovered by the application of the method. Thus,
for Descartes, philosophy is the foundation of the sciences; it is the discipline
from which all sciences derive their truth.
Descartes' guiding metaphor for philosophy and science is that of a
building. For example, in the Discourse he explains that, just as we "see many
individuals having their houses pulled down in order to rebuild them, some even
being forced to do so when the houses are in danger of falling down and their
foundations are insecure,"( 26) so with respect to his opinions," [he] could not
do better than undertake to get rid of them,^ 1 at one go, in order to replace them
afterwards with better ones ..."( 26). Similarly, in explaining the strategy of the
Meditations on First Philosophy, he says," Once the foundations of a building
are undermined, anything built on them collapses of its own accord; so I will go
straight for the basic principles on which all my former beliefs rested" (76).
Again, in Descartes' dialogue "The Search for Truth by Means of the Natural
Light," Eudoxus, the voice of Descartes, says," I would compare [knowledge] to
a badly constructed house, whose foundations are not firm. I know of no better
54 Scott Pugh
way to repair it than to knock it all down, and build a new one in its place"
(407). Thus Descartes compares the body of commonly accepted knowledge to a
house or building erected on an unstable foundation. Moreover, the task of phi
losophy, as he conceives it, is to raze the edifice and build it again. Philosophy,
however, must not rebuild the structure "only on old foundations" (Discourse
26), but on foundaticms that are firm and unshakeable—on indubitable truths.
The importance of a building as the metaphor fw knowledge and truth
is that it illustrates the separation Descartes makes in Part Three of the
Discourse between philosophy and ethics. He begins:
Now, before starting to rebuild your house, it is not enough simply to
pull it down, to make provision for materials and architects ... and to
have carefully drawn up the plans; you must also provide yourself with
some other place where you can live comfortably while building is in
progress. Likewise, lest 1 should remain indecisive in my actions while
reason obliged me to be so in my judgments, and in order to live as
happily as I could during this time, I formed for myself a provisional
moi^ code consisting ofj ust three or four maxims ...( 31)
Clearly, the house Descartes is proposing to rebuild is that of knowledge.
However, he also notes that while he is disassembling and rebuilding the house
of knowledge, it is necessary to erect and inhabit a makeshift shelter "while
building is in progress"( 31).
These two structures (the house and the temporary shelter) correspond
exactly to the realms of philosophy and ethics. For Descartes, the end of
philosophy (whether metaphysical or scientific) is the acquisition of knowledge
and tru^. Philosophy is precisely the enterprise of tearing down the old house of
knowledge, erected on dubious foundations, and replacing it with a house
grounded in "certain principles" or indubitable foundations (Discourse 31). On
the other hand, the end of ethics is happiness and resoluteness in action (31).
Ethics is the temporary shelter one must live in until philosophy completes its
project of rebuilding the edifice of knowledge and truth. Thus, Descartes refers to
his moral code as "provisional" (31). For in the Cartesian scheme, ethics is ap-
parendy a temporary convenience. It is a set of tentative and transitional rules to
follow until philosophy fulfills its end: the establishment of the structure of
truth on solid foundations. By insisting on the necessity of two independent
structures (the house under construction and the temporary shelter), Descartes ef
fectively separates philosophy from ethics. As he says," Once I had established
these [moral] maxims and set them on one side together with the truths of
faith ... I judged that I could freely undertake to rid myself of all the rest of my
opinions"( 34; my emphasis). One implication of Descartes' setting morals and
"the truth of faith" (34) together "on one side" (34), opposite "opinions" and
"propositions" (34), is that he not only separates the redms of ethics and phi
losophy, but also establishes a certain order among them. That is, he effects the
separation in such a way that he assigns a precedence to philosophy over ethics:
philosophy becomes the primary enterprise of discovering truth by "clear and cer
tain arguments"( 34), while ethics is reduced to a necessary but temporary con
venience along the way. Ethics becomes a mere auxiliary to philosophy, a
Philosophy and Ethics in Descartes 55
"provisional" guide (31), necessary only so long as the philosophical project is
still in progress.
A significant consequence of Descartes' separation of philosophy and
ethics is that, having awarded philosophy and the achievement of truth a priority
over ethics and moral action, when Descartes goes on to establish his own exis
tence and then to inquire into the nature of tlie ego, he concludes," I [am] a sub
stance whose whole essence or nature is solely to think" (36). Polyander puts it
even more emphatically when he tells Eudoxus," the one thing which I cannot
separate from myself, and which I know for certain that I am, and which I can
now assert with certainty without fear of being mistaken, that one thing, I say, is
that I am a thinking thing" {Search 415). In the Second Meditation Descartes
elaborates on what it means to be a "thing that thinks" (83). A thinking thing,
he says, is "A thing that doubts, understands, affirms, denies, is willing, is
unwilling, and also imagines and has sensory perceptions" (83). In other words,
insofar as the self is a thinking thing (which it purely is for Descartes), it is a
thing which resides in the realm of philosophy, not ethics. For ethics, as
Descartes says, is the realm of" actions"( Discourse 31)—and these are precisely
what can be known only provisionally; actions are not admitted as a constitutive
part of the ego. In a passage which Westphal says, "all but completely merges
the questions of essence and existence in the cogito" (203), Descartes writes,
"When someone says 'I am thinking, therefore I am,o r exist', he does not deduce
existence from thought by means of a syllogism, but recognizes it as something
self-evident by a simple intuition of the mind" (Objections 127). Hence, to
return to the philosophy-ethics partition, to be a thinking thing, for Descartes, is
to be a philosophizing thing, not a morally-acting thing.
Having sketched Descartes' separation of philosophy and ethics, I will
now turn to the Discourse and the Meditations to examine certain passages
which suggest a reversal of the positions which philosophy and ethics appear to
occupy in Descartes' thought-A^artesian passages which undermine Cartesian
metaphysics.
The first passage which suggests the priority of ethics to philosophy is
the very one in which Descartes seems to establish the precedence of philosophy
over ethics. As I have shown, Descartes devotes the opening paragraph of Part
Three of the Discourse to a justification of his reasons for implementing a
"provisional moral code" (31). He maintains that the creation of a provisional
moral code is analogous to the erection of a temporary shelter which one can oc
cupy while rebuilding his house (31). A moral code is necessary as a temporary
guide while the edifice of knowledge is being reconstructed.
But does not the necessity of a "moral shelter" reveal its priority to the
house of knowledge? Descartes proposes to destroy the house of knowledge
until it can be rebuilt on sound foundations, but he makes no such claim with
respect to morals. Indeed, he asserts that while the demolition and reconstruction
of the structure of knowledge is in progress, "you must provide yourself with
some other place where you can live ..."( Discourse 31; my emphasis), and this
"other place" turns out to be the sphere of ethics. In other words, Descartes
allows for the possibility of suspending intellectual beliefs (he even insists
upon it), but does not allow for the possibility of suspending moral action.
TTius, Descartes' description of ethics as provisional reveals their fundamentality.
56 Scott Pugh
For, though he speaks of them in provisional terms, he recognizes that he
cannot completely suspend them as he can his intellectual beliefs. Descartes'
own insistence on the impossibility of suspending moral action manifests the
priority of ethics to philosophy.
Descartes' analogy of the man lost in the forest is also instructive on
this point. Descartes' second moral maxim is to remain as firm and decisive as
possible in adhering to any adopted proposition or course of action (Discourse
32). In this, he says,
I would be imitating a traveller who, upon finding himself lost in the
forest, should not wander about turning this way and that, and still less
stay in one place, but should keep walking as straight as he can in one
direction, never changing it for slight reasons even if mere chance made
him choose in the first place; for in this way, even if he does not go
exactly where he wishes, he will at least end up in a place where he is
likely to be better off than in the middle of the forest.( 32)
The analogy of the man lost in the forest shows the anteriority of ethics to
philosophy in the same way as his analogy of constructing a house. Before the
man lost in the forest even approaches knowing where he wants to go, he must
already be walking. Likewise, before the ego recognizes any clear and distinct
ideas, it is already acting. In other words,j ust as the man lost in the forest must
already be walking before he can orient himself, so the ego must have a history
which precedes its role as recognizer of clear and distinct ideas. Moreover,
Descartes' analogies of constructing a house and wandering in the forest suggest
that a crucial aspect of this history, anterior to understanding, is that the ego is
acting (building, walking); it is in the realm of ethics prior to the realm of phi
losophy. Hence, though Descartes would have philosophy establish indubitable
principles in which ethics can subsequently be grounded, it seems that philoso
phy is always already grounded in ethics. Philosophy, insofar as it investigates
the ego, investigates what ethics already knows, or at least what ethics has al
ready confronted.
Descartes' fourth moral maxim also implies the priority of ethics to
philosophy. He writes:
... 1 decided to review the various occupations which men have in this
life, in order to try to choose the best... 1 thought 1 could do no better
than to continue with the very one 1 was engaged in, and devote my
whole life to cultivating my reason and advancing as far as 1 could in
the knowledge of the truth, following the method 1 had prescribed for
myself.( Discourse 33)
The fourth moral maxim p'escribes the occupation Descartes will devote himself
to: cultivating his reason and searching for truth by means of the method. That
is, the fourth moral maxim instructs him to philosophize. However, if philoso
phizing is prescribed by a moral maxim, if one philosophizes because a moral
maxim enjoins it, then morals must be in some way more authoritative and fun
damental than philosophy. In other words, the activity of philosophizing is"
Philosophy and Ethics in Descartes 57
commanded precisely by ethics. We might ask, for example, what would happen
if Descartes' fourth moral maxim had directed him not to philosophize and not to
follow the method? Presumably, in that case he would have refrained from phi
losophizing at all. Again, the fact that the activity of searching for truth is au-
thOTized by a moral maxim discloses the priority of ethics to philosophy.
Descartes' account of the source of human error in the Fourth
Meditation also suggests that ethies is more fundamental than philosophy. In his
synopsis of this meditation Descartes states, "it should be noted in passing that I
do not deal at all with sin, i.e., the error which is permitted in pursuing good and
evil, but only with the error that occurs in distinguishing truth from falsehood"
(75). Nonetheless, though Descartes explicidy tries to exclude the moral realm
from his account of error, his very description of the source of intellectual error
points to the priority of ethics over philosophy.
Descartes attributes error to the fact that," the scope of the will is wider
than the scope of the intellect"( Meditations 102). For Descartes, the function of
the intellect is "to enable me to perceive the ideas which are subjects for possible
judgments" (101). Furthermore, the function of the will "consists simply in our
ability to do or not do something (that is, to affirm or deny, to pursue or
avoid) ... it consists simply in the fact that when something is put forward for
our consideration by the intellect, we are moved to affirm or deny it, or pursue or
avoid it..." ( 101-2). Thus, as Wilson says, error occurs when the will "rashly
attach[es] an act of assent to something that the understanding does not perceive
or understand with sufficient clarity and distinctness"( 140). Conversely, in those
cases when the will acts in accordance with the understanding, it is nonetheless
not determined by the understanding, for then it would not be free (Meditations
101-102). Rather, Descartes conceives of the will as "spontaneous, occasioned,
and not determined"( Beck 211), and the moment in which it accords with the
understanding as a "mere coincidence, almost an occasionalistic correspondence"
(Beck 210). In sum,a s Descartes says, the essence of error "lies in the operation
of the will" (Meditations 103). Specifically, it lies in those instances in which
the will ventures beyond the limits of what the intellect clearly and distinctly
perceives and makes judgments about what is not understood. For this reason
Descartes asserts that "the perception of the intellect should always precede the
determination of the will" (103). Consequently, his solution to the problem of
error is simply to "restrain my will" (105), that is, "to withhold judgment on
any occasion when the truth of the matter is not clear"( 104).
Now the first problem with Descartes' account of the source of error is
that it seeks to establish an untenable order in the ego; namely, it seeks to sub
ject the will to the intellect. As Grosholz puts it, Descartes attempts to show
that, "infinitary will must be subordinate to finitary intellect ... "( 138).
However, as the analogy of the man lost in the forest shows, this is impossible.
Before the man in the forest knows where he is going, before the ego understands
truth, he must already be walking; the ego must already be acting (Discourse
32). Similarly, that Etescartes has to restrain his will until the intellect achieves
understanding shows that willing precedes understanding in the natural
constitution of the ego. The ego as an acting substance is anterior to the ego as a
substance that recognizes truth.
58 Scott Pugh
Descartes' solution to the problem of error is equally problematic. He
says," if, whenever I have to make a judgment, I restrain my will so that it ex
tends to what the intellect clearly and distincUy reveals, and no further, then it is
quite impossible fw me to go wrong" {Meditations 104-105). But what is the "I"
that is restraining the will? Of course, it can only be one operation of the think
ing thing. However, the understanding cannot restrain the will (otherwise error
would never be possible in the first place), nor does it seem likely that some
other faculty such as the senses or imagination restrains the will. Presumably
then, it is only the will which restrains itself. "I restrain my will" (105)
amounts to saying "the will restrains itself." But, if the will restrains itself
until the understanding achieves truth, the will is nonetheless acting prior to the
attainment of understanding. In this case, the will is acting only to restrain
itself, but it is acting! The will's act of self-restraint is precisely the opposite of
the course Descartes prescribes for its operation, that "the intellect should always
precede the determination of the will"( 103). In other words, the ego as an acting
substance (even if acting only to restrain the will) always precedes the ego as an
understanding substance. Ind^,i n Descartes' solution to the problem of error, it
is precisely the fact that the ego acts (to restrain the will) which eventuates the
very possibility of understanding. Thus, in Descartes' own analysis of the ego,
the operation of willing is always temporally prior to the operation of
understanding.
Furthermore, Descartes' Meditations suggests that not only must will
ing be an operation of the ego prior to understanding, it must also be more au
thoritative. When Descartes unpacks the cogito he says that "a thing that thinks"
is "a thing that doubts, understands, affirms, denies, is willing, is unwilling, and
also imagines and has sensory perceptions" (83). It is clear, though, that for
Descartes these operations of the ego are not equally authoritative. For example,
one purpose of Descartes' famous meditation on the wax is to show that," even
bodies are not strictly perceived by the senses or the faculty of the imagination
but by the intellect done, and that this perception derives not from their being
touched or seen but from their being understo^" {Meditations 86). Similarly, in
the Discourse he asserts that," neither our imagination nor our senses could ever
assure us of anything without the intervention of our intellect" (38). Hence,
though sensing, imagining and understanding are all operations of the cogito,
there is a hierarchy among them. The faculties of sensing and imagination are in
ferior to the faculty of understanding—as Descartes says, the former could never
assure us of anything without the intervention of the latter (38).
If sensing and imagining are ranked below the understanding as opera
tions of the cogito, where do we fmd Descartes positioning the operation of will
ing in this hierarchy? Descartes, of course, wants to situate it below that of un
derstanding; he wants to show that "infinitary will must be subordinate to fini-
tary intellect" (Grosholz 138). Nonetheless, Descartes' descriptions of each of
these faculties suggest that, in fact, the operation of willing is higher and more
authoritative than the operation of understanding. Descartes says the role of the
intellect (understanding) is merely to "enable me to perceive the ideas which are
the subjects ft* possible judgments ..."{ Meditations 101). The intellect's place
is simply to understand what is clearly and distinctly true. However, the role
Descartes assigns the will "consists ... in the fact that when something is put
Philosophy and Ethics in Descartes 59
forward for our consideration by the intellect, we are moved to affirm or deny it,
or pursue or avoid it ... " (102). The will is "our ability to do or not do
something ..."( 101). Thus, the operation of understanding must be subordinate
to the operation of willing in the cogito; for it is the will which authorizes the
assent or dissent, the pursuanee or avoidance, of any truth ascertained by the
intellect. The understanding simply presents clear and distinct ideas to the will,
but the will judges them, and is in this sense more authoritative.
Willing is thus both temporally prior and more authoritative than
understanding as an operation of the ego. Moreover, the fundamentality of the
will in these ways once again demonstrates a reversal of the positions Descartes
assigns to philosophy and ethics. For, as Descartes states, the will "consists in
our ability to do or not do something ..." (101). The essence of willing is
acting. Whether "walking in the forest," restraining itself, or making judgments,
the will is always the operation of the ego concerned with acting. Conversely,
the essence of understanding is the recognition of truth (101). Therefore, willing
and understanding as operations of the ego correspond with the original
dichotomy Descartes created between ethics and philosophy. The intent of
Descartes' original separation of ethics from philosophy was to subordinate
ethics to philosophy. Nevertheless, an analysis of the operations he ascribes to
the ego indicates that willing is, in fact, more fundamental than understanding.
Hence, insofar as willing corresponds with the sphere of ethics, and
understanding with that of philosophy, it follows that ethics is more
fundamental (in the senses of being temporally prior and more authoritative)
than philosophy.
Furthermore, the priority of willing to understanding as an operation of
the ego reveals the inadequacy of Descartes' characterization of the ego as a
purely "thinking thing" (82). Descartes attempts to define willing,
understanding, doubting, sensing and imagining as simply different modes of
thinking. However, his own description of the function and operation of the will
makes it clear that willing is essentially acting, not thinking. Thus, to the extent
that Descartes disallows action as a constitutive part of the ego, his analysis of it
is incomplete. Indeed, if, as I have argued, willing is the most fundamental aspect
of the ego, then Descartes omits from analysis of the ego that which is most
basic to it. In other words, if my critique of the positions assigned to philosophy
and ethics in Descartes' thought is accurate, it follows that Descartes'
characterization of the ego as a thinking substance is grossly deficient because it
leaves out the most fundamental and authoritative operation of the ego: the ego
as a morally-acting substance.
Descartes attempts to separate philosophy from ethics and subject the
latter to the former. However, his texts nonetheless suggest a reversal of the pri
ority he grants philosophy over ethics. First, that Descartes can suspend his in
tellectual beliefs, but not moral action, points to the more fundamental nature of
ethics. Second, that the enterprise of philosophy is commanded by one of the
moral maxims again shows the authority of ethics over philosophy. Third, that
rectitude of intellect depends on proper disposition of will demonstrates the
priority of ethics to philosophy. Finally, Descartes' description of the ego as
solely a thinking substance is incomplete because it excludes the fundamental
operation of the ego as a morally-acting substance.
60 Scott Pugh
BffiLIOGRAPHY
Beck,L . J. The Metaphysics ofD escartes. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1965.
Descartes, Rend. Selected Philosophical Writings. Trans. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, Dugald Murdoch. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1988.
. The Philosophical Writings ofD escartes. Vol. 2. Trans. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, Dugald Murdoch. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1984.
.D iscourse on the Method. Selected Philosophical Writings. Trans. Robert
Stoothoff. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 20-56.
. Meditations on First Philosophy. Selected Philosophical Writings. Trans.
John Cottingham. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 73-
122.
. Objections and Replies. Selected Philosophical Writings. Trans. John
Cottingham. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 123-159.
." The Search For Truth by Means of the Natural Light." The
Philosophical Writings ofD escartes. Vol. 2. Trans. John Cottingham.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984.400-420.
Grosholz, Emily R. Cartesian Method and the Problem ofR eduction. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Westphal, Merold." Socrates Between Jeremiah and Descartes: The Dialectic of
Self-Consciousness and Self-Knowledge." Philosophy and Theology. 2
(1988): 199-219.
Wilson, Margaret Dauler. Descartes. Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd.,
1978.