Aporia vol. 18 no. 2—2008
Can the Emergent Self Reemerge?
An Exploration of Emergent Dualism
and Phenomena of Unconsciousness
Tara rhoades
In his book The Emergent Self, William Hasker outlines his theory of
emergent dualism. Here, I will attempt to prove that Hasker’s emergent
dualism and certain phenomena involving hiatuses in consciousness are
inconsistent. As I will show, even the best resolution of this inconsistency
is highly problematic and calls into question the coherence of Hasker’s
emergent dualism.
According to Hasker, emergent dualism “requires us to maintain,
along with the materialists, that the potentiality for conscious life and expe-
rience really does exist in the nature of matter itself” (194). However, this
constraint requires Hasker to address two apparent features of consciousness
for which materialism does not allow: unity and free will (190). In regard
to the former, Hasker claims that consciousness cannot be based solely
in physical matter due to the unity-of-consciousness argument; because the
physical is ever changing, materialism implies that an “individual” is actually
a series of distinct individuals, each created by continual alteration of the
physical constituents of the brain (144, 190). Hasker, therefore, concludes
that there must exist an immaterial, unified subject of experience (190).
By that same token, the deterministic nature of the physical and the apparent
existence of libertarian free will associated with consciousness are incom-
patible: “It seems clear that [libertarian free will] cannot be a property that
consists of the properties of, and relations between, the parts that make up
a system of objects...It seems we shall need to recognize persons, or minds,
or souls, as unitary subjects, not analyzable as complexes of parts” (178).
Tara Rhoades is a junior majoring in philosophy and biochemistry at the University
of Delaware. Her primary academic interests include epistemology and philosophy
of law. She plans to pursue a J.D./Ph.D. upon graduation.
22 Tara rhoades
To account for both unity-of-consciousness and free will, Hasker posits that
an emergent, immaterial individual constitutes the mind:
A conscious experience simply is a unity, and to decom-
pose it into a collection of separate parts is to falsify it....
[W]hat is needed is an emergent individual, a new indi-
vidual entity which comes into existence as a result of a
certain functional configuration of the material constitu-
ents of the brain and nervous system. Endowed, as we
take it to be, with libertarian freedom, this individual is
able, in Searle’s words, to “cause things that could not be
explained by the causal behavior of the neurons.” (190)
Hasker’s account of the emergent individual seems to be consis-
tent with the unity-of-consciousness, especially when taking for granted
Hasker’s claim that the emergent individual does not consist of “previously
existing stuff” (196). He further accounts for the indeterministic nature
of the emergent individual by claiming that, while brain-brain and brain-
mind (emergent individual) interactions may be deterministic, mind-mind
interactions are the source of free will (due to the mind’s immaterial nature )
(200). Hasker explains:
Given that the field of consciousness is “in place,” the
effects of brain on mind should also be viewed determinis-
tically, but with this qualification: the resulting conscious
state depends not only on the brain-state but on the
mind’s own internal evolution, so that one can’t say in
general that a given brain input inevitably produces a cer-
tain mental effect. (200)
In the above passage, Hasker seems to be claiming not only that his
theory of the field of consciousness solves the unity-of-consciousness and
free will problems which bedevil materialists, but that the field of con-
sciousness is the criterion of personal identity. Hasker confirms that this is
indeed his claim during his later discussion of survival of death and resur-
rection. “But is the emergent soul-field...the sort of thing that can possess
self-identity over time? Clearly the answer assumed here is Yes” (233).
Since Hasker holds that the emergent individual, or “field of conscious-
ness,” is the criterion for personal identity, he claims that the sustaining
or reembodying of the field of consciousness subsequent to bodily death
would amount to personal “survival” or “resurrection.” Hasker claims that
given the logical possibility that a field of consciousness is sustainable with-
out any physical base (a brain and body), an omnipotent God could create
a resurrection body for a given field of consciousness (235).
Can The emergenT self reemerge? 23
Hasker offers an analogy to explain the origin and nature of “fields of
consciousness.” He firmly rejects Cartesian substance dualism and stresses
“that the human mind is produced by the human brain and is not a separate ele-
ment ‘added to’ the brain from outside” (189). The emergent properties of the
field of consciousness “manifest themselves when the appropriate material
constituents are placed in special, highly complex relationships” (189–90).
He gives the following analogy:
A magnetic field, for example, is a real, existing, concrete
entity, distinct from the magnet which produces it . . . .
The field is “generated” by the magnet in virtue of the
fact that the magnet’s material constituents are arranged
in a certain way . . . . But once generated, the field exerts
a causality of its own, on the magnet itself as well as on
other objects in the vicinity . . . . Keeping all this in mind,
we can say that as a magnet generates its magnetic field, so the
brain generates its field of consciousness. (190)
Let us examine the characteristics of fields of consciousness through
the magnet analogy, especially as they pertain to identity. In physics, a mag-
netic field is characterized by its mathematical properties, e.g., the force
the field exerts on a moving charged particle per unit charge and per unit
mass. However, the mathematical properties of a magnetic field (analogous
to qualitative properties of the mind) are not the criteria for the numerical
identity of a magnetic field, for we must maintain that both magnetic fields
and minds can maintain their numerical identity despite qualitative changes .
This is clear when one considers the possibility of two magnetic fields
which are qualitatively identical. For example, two magnetic fields may be
generated by two qualitatively identical coils of wire with the same amount
of current running through each, thereby producing mathematically identi-
cal fields (with all of the same quantitative properties). However, like two
qualitatively identical brains producing two qualitatively identical fields of
consciousness, the two magnetic fields are not one and the same field, i.e.,
they are numerically unique. In this case, the only distinguishing factors
between the two magnetic fields—and thereby their only claims to unique
identity—are their locations in space and the numerical difference between
their generating coils.
Given the above numerical identity characterization of magnetic
fields, I will now show that (1) a given magnetic field cannot “survive” a hia-
tus in existence and that (2) Hasker agrees with this claim. Hasker posits,
and I agree, that there is a logical possibility that magnetic fields and fields
of consciousness can persist (and maintain their numerical identities) in
the absence of their generating bodies. Hasker explains this phenomenon
by claiming that “[God] could directly sustain the field by his own power,
24 Tara rhoades
without the need for a material ‘generator’ of any kind”1 (233). (In the case
of the magnetic field, the coil of wire through which current flows is the
generator; in the case of the field of consciousness, the brain is the genera-
tor.) Therefore, it is possible that God could destroy a coil of wire through
which current was flowing yet preserve the magnetic field which the coil
had produced.
Given this possibility, let us consider the case in which the current
flowing through a coil of wire experiences a hiatus. In this scenario, the
magnetic field produced before the hiatus is preserved by God after the cur-
rent ceases to flow. When the hiatus ends and precisely the same amount
of current once again flows through the coil, it produces a magnetic field
qualitatively identical to the first. However, while the newly-generated mag-
netic field and the original magnetic field preserved by God are qualitatively
identical, it is apparent that they are not numerically identical.
Given this logical possibility, it is clear that a magnetic field produced
by a coil of wire cannot “survive” a hiatus in the current flow. The magnetic
field produced after the current flow resumes is, in fact, a new individual,
distinct from the original magnetic field that existed before the hiatus. The
numerical identity of the second magnetic field cannot be contingent upon
God failing to preserve the first; if it is at all possible that the first and
second magnetic fields are numerically nonidentical, then they must be
numerically nonidentical2 (Hasker 220).
Now, I will offer an analogous thought experiment which calls into
question Hasker’s field of consciousness as the criterion for identity. Sup-
pose a person, Will, dies. His original field of consciousness departs from
his body but is sustained by God disembodied. Will’s body is then resus-
citated by means of artificially restarting the heart. Since Will’s brain and
body have been reanimated, a new field of consciousness will be spontane-
ously and necessarily produced, for this is inherent in a living human being.
This new field of consciousness is connected with Will’s body, and we
have no apparent reason to doubt that Will is the same person that existed
previously. Even Hasker would agree: “Certainly we show little inclination
to question the identity of persons whose hearts are restarted by artificial
means after they are ‘clinically dead’” (223). However, it seems that the
original field of consciousness (sustained by God) should be the criterion
1 Kevin Corcoran suggests that perhaps God could not preserve the identity of a field in this way,
for the identity of a field may depend upon the identity of the generating body. Though I later
suggest that accepting a similar claim is an option for Hasker if he is to avoid a contradiction in his
account, my objection is distinct from Corcoran’s. Here, I side with Hasker in rejecting Corcoran’s
claim. See Hasker’s footnote 69 on page 233.
2 As shown by a formal proof of the necessity of identity by J. J. MacIntosh (Hasker 220).
Can The emergenT self reemerge? 25
of identity for Will, for it is the Will we originally knew. Since both the
original and the new fields of consciousness cannot be Will, which one
actually is Will? Hasker has given us reasons to believe either one could
be Will!3
Hasker has thought of a comparable situation:
Suppose, finally, that the brain and nervous system
of a living body were to enter a state of suspension in
which the generation of the conscious field stops alto-
gether. This might be the result of a profound coma or
the cryonic suspension of a still-living body. If the ces-
sation is irreversible, it may be plausible to identify this
as the moment of death. But if reversal is possible, we
should want to say that, during the cessation, the field
has a “virtual existence” in the physical system which has
supported it in the past and may do so again. Were rever-
sal actually to occur, there is little doubt we would in
practice acknowledge the same person to be in existence
after the hiatus. (234–5)
The case in which the cessation of the field is irreversible does not
present a problem if we do take this to be the true moment of death.4
However, the case in which the field is said to have a virtual existence may
entail a contradiction in claiming that numerical identity is retained across
the hiatus and uncovers serious issues in Hasker’s account. Even if a person
3 One may argue that this could not occur unless Will were brain dead and that, if this were the
case, he could not be resuscitated. However, if technology has thus far allowed for the restarting
of hearts, the restarting of brains does not seem to be farfetched, especially if the brain were reani-
mated soon enough as to prevent severe brain damage.
4 Hasker’s accounts of resuscitation and resurrection potentially present a much more serious
problem if we take “death” as a relative rather than an absolute term in the light of continually
advancing medical technology. Hasker draws the distinction between reversible and irreversible
cessation of the production of the field of consciousness based on the physical condition of the
brain. However, at different points in history, the line between reversible and irreversible “brain
trauma” (to use the term loosely) has been drawn at dramatically different points. We may have a
distinct idea of what constitutes the difference between reversible and irreversible states now, but
in the future, medical advancement may allow for the reversal of severe brain damage that we never
thought possible. So where do we actually draw the line: between what is reversible and irreversible
now in actuality, or what is reversible and irreversible in theory in the future? The former would
presumably entail that the field of consciousness ceases “virtual existence” in accordance with the
context of medical technology at the time, which seems to conflict with Hasker’s attempt to give an
account of the field of consciousness in naturalistic terms. The latter would require us to answer
the question as to where this line is drawn, or more importantly, whether it can be drawn. Would
all damage and decay of the brain become “reversible in theory” on this account? This may seem
preposterous, but it seems almost equally preposterous to draw the line at a distinct point in the
degeneration of the brain. How would death ever separate a field of consciousness from the body
for resurrection? In any case, in light of these unanswered questions, the following argument may
apply to a much larger range of cases than indicated by the discussion that follows.
26 Tara rhoades
underwent cryonic suspension and it were possible that he would be reani-
mated one day, this does not ensure that he would ever actually be revived.
In that case, when would the virtually-existent conscious field depart from
the body to be resurrected? It seems implausible to think either that his
conscious field would be lost forever or that God would choose an arbitrary
time to resurrect the conscious field in the afterlife. Alternatively, if the
conscious field departs from the human body to be resurrected immedi-
ately after cryonic suspension, any field produced in the reanimated corpse
would be qualitatively similar but numerically distinguished from the origi-
nal, departed field which exists elsewhere as a resurrected body. Whichever
account Hasker prefers, a problem still remains concerning the necessity
of identity. Since these two conscious fields could simultaneously exist,
Hasker’s claims about resurrection and resuscitation are incompatible with
one another and fail to show which field of consciousness is numerically
identical with the individual who existed before the cryonic freezing.
Hasker is left with one of two choices. (1) The field of consciousness
is not the criterion for identity, and instead, the brain is ultimately the
criterion for identity; in other words, the resuscitated Will is the true Will.
Or (2) an individual cannot survive a hiatus in his field of consciousness’s
existence, that is, the resurrected Will is the true Will (Choice (2) is analo-
gous to the case of the magnetic field, which cannot “survive” a hiatus in its
existence). If Hasker adopts option (1), the only possible route to survival
of death and subsequent resurrection would be Inwagen’s body-switching5
(231). However, while Hasker concedes that body-switching is logically pos-
sible, he believes that it “leaves much to be desired,” requiring a world
which “would seem to be ‘massively irregular’” (223–24). If Hasker were
to choose option (2), which I believe is more likely, Hasker would have to
maintain that an individual’s identity cannot be preserved in association
with his earthly body after a hiatus in the field of consciousness’s existence.
Therefore, if I undergo cryonic freezing and my field of consciousness
ceases to be generated, and then my body is revived, generating a new field
of consciousness—that bodily individual is not me! I either no longer exist
5 Van Inwagen holds that no immaterial soul exists but that a resurrection consistent with
materialism is possible (Hasker 222). He theorizes that God “switches” an individual’s actual, once-
living body for a qualitatively identical, “fake” body upon the individual’s death. (Therefore, the
individual’s corpse is not the same body which once lived.) God then resuscitates the “real” body,
which is numerically identical with the once-living individual. Personal identity is maintained
through the transition. Hasker shows that body-switching is the only coherent account of resurrec-
tion consistent with materialism (231). Since option (1) entails that the brain is the criterion for
personal identity, a resurrection consistent with materialism is required.
Can The emergenT self reemerge? 27
(albeit my corpse is generating a new individual) or God is sustaining my
field elsewhere.6
Hasker may attempt to solve this problem by claiming that God main-
tains an individual’s field of consciousness while the brain is in an idle state
(i.e., when the brain is not currently producing and maintaining a field of
consciousness). Then, God would “replace” the original field of conscious-
ness when the individual’s body is awakened or resuscitated. Thus, identity
is maintained and the individual “survives” the hiatus.
However, this rebuttal conflicts with a legitimate concern which
Edwin Hui raises in the context of reembodiment, with which Hasker con-
ditionally sympathizes:
Wouldn’t the newly formed resurrection body generate
its own field of consciousness, and thus be unavailable
to the self in need of reembodiment? It seems that this
would indeed be the case, if we suppose that the body is
first created, with its vital functions energized, before the
“infusion” of the disembodied self. Rather, we must imag-
ine the new body created from the very beginning as the
body of this very soul; the renewed self must be “in charge”
of the resurrection body right from the start. (235)
If the production of a field of consciousness is inherent and spon-
taneous when matter is sufficiently arranged, it seems that a new field of
consciousness would be produced despite the fact that the old one was
“in charge” from the start. It may be that, in the case of resurrection, God
suspends the laws of nature so that the resurrection body will not produce
its own field of consciousness and will only maintain one after it is infused
with its intended soul. Perhaps the resurrection body is made of a different
sort of matter that does not have this field-producing property.
However, in the case of resuscitation, would Hasker be willing
to admit that God suspends this law of nature (which states that mat-
ter arranged sufficiently will produce a field of consciousness) every time
someone’s field of consciousness ceases to be generated? Considering
that Hasker conditionally agrees with Hui and objects to the account of
body-switching because it entails substantial irregularities, I think not.
This sounds suspiciously like Cartesian substance dualism, which Hasker
6 This also poses the following problem: what besides cryonic freezing or a profound coma causes
a cessation in the generation of the field of consciousness? Every phenomenon which is ordinarily
considered unconsciousness would entail either (1) the persistence of an “unconscious” field of
consciousness or (2) a hiatus in the field of consciousness. (1) is a bizarre and seemingly incoher-
ent account. (2) would result in the annihilation of the previous field of consciousness and the
creation of a subsequent field. Personal identity would not be maintained across the hiatus in
the field’s existence. For example, if the phenomenon of dreamless sleep entailed (2), one would
awake as a different individual than the one who tucked oneself in.
28 Tara rhoades
thoroughly rejects due to the interaction problem and other difficulties:
“In rejecting [Cartesian substance dualism], we implicitly affirm that the
human mind is produced by the human brain and is not a separate element
‘added to’ the brain from outside” (189). However, this would be the case if
the aforementioned “replacement” of fields of consciousness is the method
by which God maintains the identity of individuals in association with
their bodies across hiatuses.
To reiterate, I see three possible ways to amend Hasker’s account of
emergent dualism in order to account for these hiatuses, each of which
entails rejecting one of his conflicting claims: (1) Ultimately, the brain is the
criterion for identity, not the field of consciousness, and body-switching is
the only possible route to resurrection; (2) Identity is not maintained across
a hiatus in the field of consciousness, and for phenomena of unconscious-
ness which constitute hiatuses, we must maintain, contrary to intuition,
that numerically distinct individuals exist before and after a given hiatus;
(3) Identity is maintained across hiatuses by God’s intervention, entailing
seemingly unacceptable irregularities in the physical world and a Cartesian
dualism-type interaction problem. In choosing option (1), Hasker retains
his explanation for unity-of-consciousness and free will, but not resurrec-
tion. Option (2) allows Hasker to retain his account of resurrection as well,
but forces him to reject his claim that a field of consciousness can retain
numerical identity through a virtual existence, and yields the bizarre result
that numerically distinct individuals can occupy the same body, not simul-
taneously but over time. Option (3) allows Hasker to salvage his entire
account of emergent dualism from the field’s origin to a hiatus in the field
of consciousness, at which point Hasker would have to retract his insis-
tent claim that the mind is not “added to” the brain from outside. I am
inclined to say that Hasker would amend his account in accordance with
option (2) or (3) since these allow him to give up substantially less of his
story. However, each option yields results which are highly undesirable for
Hasker’s purposes; this trilemma reveals a serious flaw in Hasker’s account
of emergent dualism.7
7 I would like to thank Joel Pust for his helpful suggestions and comments on multiple drafts of
this paper.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Hasker, William. The Emergent Self. Cornell UP: Ithaca, 1999.