AporiaVol. 14 number 1—2004
The Possibility of a Christian Appropriation of
Aristotle’s Ethical Philosophy
CHARLIERITCH
istorically, the Christian tradition has heavily relied on Aristotle’s
H
ethical philosophy to provide a conceptual basis for the articula-
tion of its own ethical doctrines, but Aristotle’s concepts are com-
ing up less and less frequently in contemporary ethical debates. The
Roman Catholic Church, however, continues to be characterized by their
reliance on Aristotelian formulations of theological doctrine. This, how-
ever, is not true of the Protestant church, which produced many of the
Modern and nineteenth century attempts to find rational grounds for eth-
ical philosophy without reference to Aristotle. According to Alasdair
MacIntyre, these attempts have failed, and as a result there is no longer a
“rational way of securing moral agreement in our culture.”1It would seem,
then, that the Protestant church would do well to reexamine Aristotle’s
ethical philosophy if they are to preserve the integrity of their ethical claims
in the contemporary context.
Not all interpretations of Aristotle’s ethical philosophy portray him
as particularly helpful for articulating the ethics of the Christian tradition,
though. A particularly problematic interpretation comes from Martha
Nussbaum’s work The Fragility of Goodness. She argues that Aristotle is a
completely anthropocentric ethical philosopher, and he is thus able to
1MacIntyre 6.
Charlie Ritch is a senior at Wheaton College majoring in philosophy. He is pursuing grad-
uate studies in biblical exegesis. This essay won third place in the 2003 R. E. Lee Contest
at Wheaton College.
46 CHARLIERITCH
avoid the problems of his higher-minded predecessors. Nussbaum lauds
the NEbecause it is authentic and unafraid to admit the messiness of the
human ethical endeavor. Her interpretation of Aristotle’s ethical philoso-
phy is marked by three distinct arguments:
1. Ethical goodness is “species-relative,” and thus the human
good must be good for humans and humans alone.
2. There can be no hierarchy of ethical goods because there is
no common standard by which to measure. Thus, the ordinary
moral virtues are just as important for the good life as is the
virtue of contemplation.
3. Ethical dictums are summaries of good decisions, not uni-
versally applicable laws. General principles are naturally sus-
ceptible to revision.
Since the Christian notion of ethical goodness is based on the eternality of
God’s character and man’s having been made very much like God, it
would seem that according to Nussbaum, Aristotle’s ethical philosophy
would not permit a Christian appropriation. Before it can be suggested
that the Protestant church return to Aristotle for ethical insight, it must be
determined whether or not Aristotle contradicts basic Christian presup-
positions. I will argue that he does not and that in spite of the apparent
contradictions posed by Nussbaum’s interpretations, Aristotle may be read
as anticipating the ethical philosophy of the New Testament.
Nussbaum’s argument that the good life for human beings cannot be
informed by the lives of gods or lower animals comes from her under-
standing of Aristotelian anthropology. Aristotle does indeed develop his
concept of ethical goodness on the basis of his understanding of anthro-
pology, and so it is not wholly improper for Nussbaum to call Aristotle’s
ethics “anthropocentric.” Happiness has meaning only insofar as it
describes the best possible state of human life. Aristotle concludes that this
perfection can be nothing else but eudaimonia or happiness. But before
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 47
Aristotle can portray the perfection of human life, he must first explain
what it is that must be perfected.2
Because humans are distinguished from animals by their superior
use of reason, their proper function must involve their rational faculty.
And since ethical philosophy is concerned not just with thought, but also
with action, reason must be used for practical ends. This means that what-
ever else ethical goodness turns out to be, it must practicable and attain-
able by rational human beings. Nussbaum concludes that this eliminates
certain candidates for the good life. She writes:
There is no point in talking about the good life in an ethical
inquiry insofar as this life is not practically attainable by beings
with our capabilities. The life of a divine being might be ever so
admirable; but the study of this life, insofar as it lies beyond
our capabilities, is not pertinent to the practical aims of ethics.3
Nussbaum is here responding to the ethical philosophy of Plato, in which
the ethical endeavor is portrayed as a pursuit of the transcendent idea of
the good, a decidedly nonhuman concept. Aristotle explicitly rejects this
conception of goodness, because even if the good were “something existing
separately and absolute, it clearly [would] not be practicable or attainable by
man; but the Good which we are now seeking is a good within human
reach.”4
Nussbaum argues that the attainability of goodness provides param-
eters within which the good life must be defined. The life of a god, which
is free from the fragility that characterizes human life, is essentially unat-
tainable by human beings. And the life of a cow, which would not make
adequate use of human reason, is not worth attaining. Thus, in
2Nichomachean Ethics (NE) 1097b 22–30.
3 Nussbaum 263.
4NE1096 30 ff.
48 CHARLIERITCH
Nussbaum’s words, Aristotle’s conception of ethical goodness is “species-
relative”—that is, the ultimate good for each species is only relevant as a
good within that species.
Nussbaum’s argument that the good life must consist in a plurality of
ethical goods, each of which is indispensable to the whole, comes from
Aristotle’s understanding of pleasure. She emphasizes the ways in which
Aristotle’s concept of pleasure differed from Plato’s. Plato argues that what-
ever is pleasant participates in one universal and abstract idea of pleasure.
This allowed for a kind of ethical precision akin to scientific measure-
ment.5If all ethical activities share the common characteristic of pleasure
to one degree or another, then they can be measured against one another.
The philosopher must determine which activity possesses the purest, most
stable, and truest pleasure, and this activity will be the good life.6
Nussbaum argues that this perspective is repugnant to the basic realities of
the human condition. Different pleasures are not all qualitatively similar,
and to see them as such compromises the authentic complexity of human
life.
In the first part of Book X Aristotle argues that pleasure attends the
perfection of an activity. Thus, the character of a pleasure depends on the
nature of the activity.7Nussbaum reasons from this that ethical values are
incommensurable with one another—that is, because there is no common
standard against which to measure ethical values, each of them is unique
and indispensable to the good life.
[Aristotle’s] ethical works display a conception of the best
human life as a life inclusive of a number of different con-
stituents, each being defined apart from each of the others and
valued for its own sake. Part of the very account of excellence
of character is the stipulation that fine actions are chosen in
each case for their own sake, not simply for the sake of some
5See Fragility of Goodness, “The Protagoras: A Science of Practical Reasoning.”
6See Ibid., “The Republic: True Value and the Standpoint of Perfection.”
7NE1175a 23–25.
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 49
further reward or consequence (1105a 32). Each excellence is
defined separately as something that has value in itself. To
value each of these separate items, each of which has its sepa-
rate account, for what it itself is, seems to entail recognition of
its distinctiveness and separateness from each of the others.8
The ethical value of an activity depends on the degree to which it promotes
the agent’s happiness. Since the pleasure (and thus the ethical value) of
each activity is unique, it follows that the good life will be characterized by
a plurality of indispensable ethical activities—including many that are sub-
ject to external contingencies. There is no way to promote the contempla-
tive life, or any other life dominated by only one ethical activity, as the best
sort of human life. The very complexity of life requires that each of the
virtues be enjoyed for its own sake.
This drastically affects the way we think about the good life. For
Aristotle, eudaimoniadoes not describe any one part of life; rather it char-
acterizes the whole of one’s life. Thus, in the early chapters of the NE,
Aristotle writes:
Happiness, as we said, requires both complete goodness and a
complete lifetime. For many reverses and vicissitudes of all sorts
occur in the course of life, and it is possible that the most pros-
perous man may encounter great disasters in his declining
years, as the story of Priam in the epics; but no one calls a man
happy who meets with misfortunes like Priam’s, and comes to
a miserable end.9
Because every ethically significant activity is really valuable in and of itself,
and because no good can be foregone without significant loss, Nussbaum
argues that the good life is profoundly susceptible to forces of luck. The
8Nussbaum 296.
9 NE1100a 5–9.
50 CHARLIERITCH
good life is characterized by a complex composition of ethical activities,
many of which can be made impossible by fortune. And if the stability is
compromised, then one’s enjoyment of the good life is compromised.
One final aspect of Nussbaum’s interpretation must be addressed.
She argues that general principles in the Aristotelian framework are only
summaries of good decisions, and as such they should not be portrayed as
universal laws. In Book II Aristotle establishes a definition of virtue based
on a certain understanding of an ethical principle:
Virtue . . . is a settled disposition of the mind determining the
choice of actions and emotions consisting essentially in the
observance of the mean relative to us, this being determined by
principle, that is, as the prudent man would determine it.10
In Book VI, he more carefully examines the principle: “It is right to choose
the mean and to avoid excess and deficiency, and . . . the mean is pre-
scribed by the right principle.”11Nussbaum argues that Aristotle’s principle
is often confused with contemporary ethical dictums. Instead of being the
beginning of the reasoning process, as first principles are in the theoretical
sciences, she maintains that the right principle is actually a collection of
well-made decisions which form a sort of provisional rule when taken as a
whole.
Principles are perspicuous descriptive summaries of good judg-
ments, valid only to the extent to which they correctly describe
such judgments. They are normative only insofar as they trans-
mit in economical form the normative force of the good con-
crete decisions of the wise person and because we wish for
various reasons to be guided by that person’s choices. We note
that their very simplicity of economy will be, on this concep-
tion, a double-edged attribute: for while it may help the princi-
10Ibid. 1107a 1–5, emphasis added.
11Ibid. 1138b 17–19.
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 51
ple to perform certain pedagogical and steering functions, it
will also be likely to make it less correct as a summary of numer-
ous and complex choices.12
The important thing to note about Nussbaum’s characterization is
that it unequivocally precludes the possibility that ethical principles in any
way reflect the unchanging character of God. The normative force of any
ethical principle extends just so far as the principle is a formula for what a
prudent person would do in a given situation. But since a general princi-
ple cannot account for the particularities of different situations, there exists
the possibility that any and every principle will need to be corrected.
Rather than reflecting the perfection of divine goodness, Nussbaum argues
that ethical principles are only useful on certain occasions:
When there is no time to formulate a fully concrete decision,
scrutinizing all the features of the case at hand, it is better to
follow a good summary rule than to make a hasty and inade-
quate concrete choice. . . . Rules are necessities because we are
not always good judges; if we really were operating ethically as
well as we should, we would not have the same need of them.13
Ethical principles are thus a type of crutch on which we depend in imper-
fect cases where our deliberative capacities are limited by time. The princi-
ples are not essential to ethical goodness because they only summarize.
And since it is the nature of ethical deliberation to be concerned with the
particular situations, strategies that depend on general principles are fun-
damentally inadequate.
From what has been said about Nussbaum’s interpretation, the
prospects for a Christian appropriation of Aristotle’s ethical philosophy
are fairly grim. First, the Christian notion of goodness is not “species-rel-
12Nussbaum 299.
13Ibid. 304.
52 CHARLIERITCH
ative,” insofar as the ultimate human good is in fact informed by the knowl-
edge of God. Thus, the good for humans depends greatly on who God is
and what He is like.14It is not uncommon for the Christian to describe his
ethical endeavor as the pursuit to be godly, or godlike. Such a pursuit is not
an option in Nussbaum’s version of Aristotelian ethics. She maintains that
the richness of human life is directly related to its fragility. The life of God
should not even enter into the discussion of the human good.
Perhaps it will be objected that it is more appropriate to say that
Christians strive to be Christ-like. Therefore, we might say that even theo-
logically, our aim is within our species since our aim is most properly the
man Jesus. But we must remember that this man was no ordinary man. He
would not have been able to accomplish the purposes of the Messiah of
Israel as a mere mortal. Rather, Jesus, as the Messiah was the god-man. He
was and is the only man who can claim equal ontological status with God
the Father. As such we may say that Jesus was for all practical purposes
another species of being. This, too, has its problems, since Christians do not
ultimately aim at Jesus’ ontological status, but at his ethical behavior. They
do not, therefore, think that through their ethical striving they might
attain divinity. Nevertheless, the Christian’s ethical model for human
behavior is ontologically superior to humans.
It is also problematic that, according to Nussbaum, Aristotle seems to
affirm the plurality of ethical values and prohibits the privileging of any
one activity over another. Jesus teaches that we ought “not to be anxious for
[our] life, as to what [we] shall eat, or what [we] shall drink; nor for [our]
body, as to what [we] shall put on. [For] is not life more than food, and the
body than clothing?”15This suggests that there is something more worthy of
our attention, something of higher value to us than our everyday concerns
for food and shelter. Instead of occupying ourselves with these concerns,
14 This is especially evident in the context of God’s historical covenant with Israel. They ought never to
break the terms of the covenant since God will never break them. But this might be expected of any
human relationship. Where the theological element of ethics comes through most forcefully is in the con-
cept of mercy. Humans are expected to “love their enemies” because even when they were the enemies
of God, he loved them and showed them mercy, rather than the justice that was due them.
15Matt. 6:34.
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 53
Jesus exhorts us to turn to the values of the kingdom of God, and the right-
eousness associated therewith. Here we must face the reality that not only
are we to aim at the good of another species, but this good is higher, bet-
ter, and more worthy of our attention than the ordinary practical goods
associated with our species.
Finally, the notion that there are no ethical principles apart from
mere summaries of good decisions is inconsistent with the notion of the
divine law as a revelation of God’s character. It could well be argued that
the Old Testament law in fact provides a perfect example of the provi-
sional nature of ethical principles. Were not some laws found to be, in
some degree, unsuitable for the first century church? Even many of the Ten
Commandments have acceptable exceptions. It would be a mistake to draw
conclusions about the nature of law in general from particular manifesta-
tions through history. The changes in Israel’s law code in the New
Testament tell more about the context of certain laws and commandments
and the ultimate revelation of God in Jesus than they do about the nature
of ethical principles. Furthermore, even within the law there are certain
dictums not subject to change. For example, while the prohibition against
killing can be amended in certain situations, it seems that there are cases
in which killing would be eternally forbidden. As G. E. M. Anscombe
argues, anyone who even entertains the notion that judicial execution of
the innocent might be ethically acceptable is morally unfit for ethical dis-
cussion, for “he shows a corrupt mind.”16Furthermore, the general princi-
ple that we are to “love our neighbors as ourselves” does not seem to admit
of any exceptions.17
The obstacles to a Christian appropriation of Aristotle’s ethical phi-
losophy are partly the result of Nussbaum’s overstating Aristotle’s position.
Nevertheless, she works from significant texts in the NE, which are not eas-
ily explained away. One problem stands out in her treatment of the NE
though. On her interpretation, the arguments Aristotle makes in Books
16Anscombe 42.
17Matt. 22:39.
54 CHARLIERITCH
I–IX cannot be reconciled with his arguments in Book X. Nussbaum
asserts, “We can say with confidence that [chapters 6–9 of Book X] do not
fit into the argument of the NE.”18 She has so committed Aristotle to an
anthropocentric ethical stance that she is quite unable to explain his tran-
scendent turn in Book X. But it is at this point that the whole of the NE
becomes available for Christian appropriation. If Aristotle had left his eth-
ical inquiry with moral virtue without suggesting that humans were meant
for something higher, then his ethical philosophy would be of little use to
Christianity. Book X makes it clear that moral virtue begins the ethical
endeavor, but it does not complete it. Nussbaum cannot assimilate Book X
into her interpretive framework because Nussbaum takes as the pinnacle of
the NEthose books that Aristotle intended as stepping-stones.
While it might be true that among the moral virtues there can be no
significant hierarchy, in Book X Aristotle clearly introduces a category of
ethical activity that he takes to be higher and more worthy of pursuit than
the moral virtues. Aristotle begins by reiterating his notion of pleasure,
which, as we have seen, is indispensable to his ethical philosophy. Aristotle
argues that pleasures are characterized by the activities with which they are
associated, and, therefore, “as activities are diverse, so also are their pleas-
ures.”19Thus, Nussbaum argues that pleasures are so unique and so partic-
ular that they cannot be qualitatively compared, as Plato had proposed.
This is how she justifies the claim that Aristotle promotes a plurality of eth-
ical values. This is not, however, the direction taken by Aristotle. Instead,
the diversity of pleasures provokes a discussion of which pleasures are most
worthy of pursuit. Whereas the diversity of pleasure leads Nussbaum to
draw out conclusions about the incommensurability of ethical goods, for
Aristotle, it forms the basis of an ethical hierarchy.
Pleasures correspond to the activities to which they belong; it is
therefore that pleasure, or those pleasures, by which the activ-
18Nussbaum 377.
19NE1176a 1–2.
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 55
ity, or the activities, of the perfect and supremely happy man
are perfected, that must be pronounced human in the fullest
sense. The other pleasures are so only in a secondary degree.20
Aristotle here argues that what is most appropriately called pleasure is asso-
ciated with the most distinctively human activities. It is not denied that
there are many other activities that seem pleasant to men with more ani-
mal-like sensibilities, but these are only pleasant in an analogical sense.
True pleasure is that which the good man recognizes to be pleasant, for his
perspective is decisive in ethical matters. And the good man will choose to
pursue not all pleasures, but the highest and best of them.
Aristotle assumes that within the virtues some are more intrinsically
valuable than others. These are the virtues associated with the “divinest”
part of the human.21From this, it is apparent that Aristotle’s anthropology
is not as exclusive as Nussbaum would suggest. Human life shares many
characteristics with both the animal and divine. This means that an
“anthropocentric ethic” involves more than just figuring out what is specif-
ically good for the human qua human; it is also concerned with what is
good for the human quaanimal and quadivine. Contrary to Nussbaum’s
argument, Book X is not the first time we encounter this notion. In Book
I, chapter 7 Aristotle argues that the Supreme Good is happiness, which is
entirely self-sufficient and desirable for its own sake. When the idea of a
proper human function is added to this, it naturally follows that perfect
happiness will accompany the most self-sufficient activity that is most truly
desired for its own sake.22 While there might be several different human
excellences (i.e. generosity, friendship, and contemplation), true happiness
must be associated with the highest of them.23 It should thus come as no
surprise that in Book X Aristotle reasons that the contemplative life is the
highest good for humankind because it is the most self-sufficient and most
20Ibid. 1176a 26–28.
21 Ibid. 1177a 17.
22 Ibid. 1097a 1–15.
23 Ibid. 1098a 15–17.
56 CHARLIERITCH
desirable in itself. Nevertheless, Aristotle seems to agree that this “divine
life” is, to some degree, unattainable by humans. This, he says, is due to the
fact that the good life he is proposing is actually better fit for gods than for
men. It is a life based on the highest part of the human person, and this
part in itself is superior to the whole.24
Though some of the problems for a Christian appropriation of
Aristotle’s ethical philosophy come from Nussbaum’s failure to account
for all of Aristotle’s thought, some of them come from Aristotle’s failure to
complete the picture of perfect human happiness. For Aristotle, the high-
est good is naturally beyond reach because it is the virtue better suited for
the gods who need not attend to the lower virtues in order to pursue the
higher. Humans are such that the contemplative life will always be inter-
rupted by the demands of practical necessity. It is precisely because human
life is characterized by vulnerability that any distinctively human ethic will
fail to establish a complete picture of the good life. Nevertheless, the
Christian appropriation of Aristotle’s ethical philosophy is possible,
because Aristotle himself acknowledges that his portrayal of the good life is
attainable only in theory. Aristotle writes:
[We ought not] obey those who enjoin that a man should have
man’s thoughts and a mortal the thoughts of mortality, but we
ought so far as possible to achieve immortality, and do all that
man may to live in accordance with the highest thing in him;
for though this be small in bulk, in power and value it far sur-
passes all the rest.25
Apart from the Christian vantage point, which allows for an afterlife
in which the immortality of the human being may be realized, Aristotle’s
ethical philosophy might appear to be an exercise in futility. But if Aristotle
is taken as anticipating the ethics of the New Testament, then what we
have is an ethics that is incomplete, but not inconsistent. Book X marks the
24 Ibid. 1077b 27–33.
25 Ibid. 1177b 30–35, emphasis added.
CHRISTIANAPPROPRIATIONOFARISTOTLE 57
beginning of Aristotle’s clearest and most appropriate conception of the
good life. But it was left to others (namely, the authors of the New
Testament) to complete the picture. Because Nussbaum will not entertain
the possibility that Aristotle’s ethical philosophy is conceptually incomplete,
she is forced to conclude that he is being inconsistent when he advocates
the contemplative life in Book X. The idea that we cannot treasure some
ethical goods over others, that we must always treat general principles as
tentative approximations, or that we must aim low, hoping to achieve only
those goods available to our species all result from reading the ethical phi-
losophy in Books I–IX as the final word on the good life for humans. But
Aristotle himself suggests that these earlier books function as a beginning,
albeit a necessary beginning, but not the final word on the good life. The
moral virtues are a dialectical foundation upon which to discover the high-
est and truest good life—for Aristotle this was the contemplative life, but for
the Christian it is heaven. In both cases the point is the same: humans are
free from worrying about their basic necessities, so that they can enjoy the
free exercising of their highest and most noble faculties.
Nussbaum’s problematic interpretations of Aristotle’s ethics only
account for part of Aristotle’s ethical philosophy. And when taken as a
whole, it can be portrayed as affirming the goodness of the common moral
life while also advocating and promoting the contemplative life. On this
interpretation, Aristotle can greatly facilitate Protestant and Catholic artic-
ulations of their ethical doctrines. Aristotle’s careful assessment of the
moral life provides a clear basis for understanding how God intended
humans to live. It must, however, be acknowledged that the current world
is not safe for ordinary life. This is, perhaps, why we saw earlier that Jesus
does not encourage his followers to give their mundane needs too much
attention. The human ethical endeavor involves pursuing the ultimately
good life that combines the best aspects of the moral life and the contem-
plative life. For Aristotle, this was practically impossible, because it was
inevitable that the entanglements of the moral life would prevent the full
58 CHARLIERITCH
enjoyment of the contemplative life. For Catholics and Protestants, the
good life is not something to be enjoyed in the present world, but in
heaven. Whereas Aristotle stops by saying that we ought to try as far as we
are able to live like gods in uninterrupted enjoyment of our highest facul-
ties, the New Testament urges us to anticipate a world where we will be able
to enjoy such a life. Heaven provides the interpretive lens that completes
Aristotle’s picture of the good life. Because both the Catholic and
Protestant Church have this lens in their conceptual framework, Aristotle’s
ethics can provide helpful assistance to the clear and complete articulation
of their own ethical doctrines. And they would do well to place their artic-
ulations of heaven on a solid foundation of Aristotelian ethical philoso-
phy.
References
Anscombe, G. E. M. “Modern Moral Philosophy.” Virtue Ethics. Ed. Roger
Crips and Michael Slote. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics. Trans. H. Rackham. Cambridge: Harvard
Loeb Classical Library, 1934.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. After Virtue.2nd ed. Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1984.
Nussbaum, Martha. The Fragility of Goodness. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1986.