Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
Exclusivism in Hick’s Pluralistic Hypothesis
Matthew a. RogeRs
In An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent, John
Hick presents an impressive theory of religious pluralism. His theory is
intended to explain how it may be that all of the great religious tradi-
tions are essentially true despite their apparent contradictions. Hick points
out that there are many religions in the world, each of which seems to be
incompatible with others. For those who do not wish to deny that there is
any truth in religion and at the same time do not wish to claim that one
religion is true and all others delusory, there is, Hick says, a need for a plu-
ralistic hypothesis—a hypothesis that would explain how different religions
could be true.
Hick argues that we need a pluralistic hypothesis because it is unrea-
sonably arbitrary to be religious exclusivists—that is, to accept the truth of
our own religious tradition while denying that of other religious traditions.
This follows because adherents of other religions have the exact same sort
of justification for their religious beliefs that we have for our own—namely,
religious experience (Interpretation 235). This assertion has been criti-
cized, but for the sake of argument, I will assume that it is correct. However,
since Hick only includes a few religions in his discussion, I will argue that
his pluralistic hypothesis is guilty of the very same “unreasonable arbitrari-
ness” for which he criticizes exclusivism. Thus, if Hick correctly supposes
that we need a hypothesis that avoids this “implausible arbitrariness,” his
own hypothesis is inadequate. I will consider two objections to my argu-
ment, and I will also suggest how Hick’s hypothesis could be modified to
overcome its inadequacy.
Matthew A. Rogers is a senior majoring in philosophy and Japanese at North
Central College. His primary philosophical interests include ethics and philosophy
of religion.
60 Matthew a. RogeRs
Hick’s Hypothesis
Hick argues that the universe is “religiously ambiguous” (Interpretation
73–124). This means that all of the features of the universe can be inter-
preted equally well naturalistically or religiously. There is no argument that
provides any rational justification for believing that there are any gods,
any supernatural forces, or any divine reality. Neither is there any argu-
ment that provides any rational justification for believing that any of these
things does not exist. While Hick does not claim that any religious belief is
true, he does argue that it is rational to hold religious beliefs on the basis
of religious experience. He further argues that if we do so, we must accept
others’ religious beliefs that they have formed on the basis of their own
religious experience (Interpretation 235). This means it is rational to accept
all religious beliefs that are based on religious experience.
But how can we do this if these religious beliefs contradict each other?
Hick’s answer is that we can postulate that the various religions are all
equally valid interpretations of the same divine reality. According to Hick’s
hypothesis, there is a divine reality, which he calls “the Real” (Interpretation
236). The Real is ineffable, and we cannot experience this reality as it is any
more than we can experience a table as it is. A table is empty space with sub-
atomic particles bouncing around in it, but we don’t experience it that way.
We experience it as a hard solid surface. In the same way, we experience the
Real not as it is, but in whatever way we are capable of experiencing it. How
we experience it depends on our culture, and since it is experienced differ-
ently in every culture, there are numerous religions. Still, each religion is an
appropriate response to the Real (Interpretation 242–45, 248).
Yet how can we truly know that each religion is an appropriate
response to the Real? Hick’s answer is that each religion effectively facilitates
soteriological transformation. Soteriological transformation is what Hick
calls the transformation “from self-centeredness to Reality-centeredness.”
According to Hick, “ordinary human existence is defective, unsatisfactory,
lacking” (Interpretation 32), and characterized by “misery, unreality, triviality,
and perversity” (Interpretation 36). This is because people are self-centered
rather than Reality-centered. People need to be saved or liberated from this
state of affairs. The great religious traditions all recognize this and provide
ways of accomplishing this soteriological transformation. Since all of the
great traditions are successful in transforming and saving or liberating peo-
ple, they are all appropriate responses to the Real (Interpretation 36, 307).
exclusivisM in hick’s PluRalistic hyPothesis 61
My Objection to Hick’s Hypothesis
But why should we suppose that soteriological effectiveness is the
right criterion for judging the appropriateness of a religion? The notion
of soteriological transformation is not a universal feature of religion—far
from it. It is unique to a particular type of religion, which Hick calls “post-
axial religion” (Interpretation 28). This type of religion is a relatively recent
phenomenon. It began, according to Hick, in the “axial age” (approxi-
mately 800 to 200 BCE). It seems to have had no existence before that,
and although religions of this type have become dominant in the modern
world, they are still not universal.
Hick’s motivation for formulating a pluralistic hypothesis is to show
how all religions that are based on religious experience can be compatible
with each other (Interpretation 235). But a great deal of religious experi-
ence has occurred outside the context of soteriologically-oriented religions.
Thus, in making soteriological effectiveness the criterion for judging the
truth of religion, Hick’s pluralism is actually very exclusive. As Keith Ward
has argued, it is “exclusivism at a relatively abstract and general level” (111).
Though Ward says that there is nothing wrong with excluding religions
that are not soteriologically-oriented, there actually is something wrong
with this proposition. Excluding pre-axial religions and other religions that
say nothing about soteriology violates Hick’s own reasoning regarding the
need for the pluralistic hypothesis and commits Hick to the very arbitrari-
ness he wants to avoid.
To see that this is so, let us more closely examine Hick’s reasoning
regarding the need for a pluralistic hypothesis. As previously mentioned,
he argues that it is rational to hold religious beliefs that are based on reli-
gious experience. He argues for this by pointing out that we believe what
our sense perceptions tell us is true about our physical environment. This
is rational because it is also rational to accept what seems to be true in the
absence of countervailing evidence. Thus, just as it is rational for us to
accept our sense perceptions as veridical in the absence of countervailing
evidence, it is rational for us to accept religious experience as veridical in
the absence of countervailing evidence. “When someone believes in the
existence of God on the basis of compelling religious experience, his or her
belief is accordingly a case of rational or reasonable or well-founded belief”
(Interpretation 221).
Hick notes that there are a variety of different religious traditions
in which people have religious experience. It follows that it is rational
for people in all these different traditions to believe that their experi-
ence is veridical. Furthermore, Hick argues that it is not reasonable for us
to reject as delusory the religious experience taking place in these other
62 Matthew a. RogeRs
religious traditions if we accept the veridicality of that of our own tradi-
tion (Interpretation 235). This is because we can see that believers of other
religions have the exact same sort of justification for their beliefs that we
have for our own. It would be unreasonably arbitrary for us to say that
our own religious experience is veridical and all others’ religious experi-
ence is delusory. And this, according to Hick, is why we need a pluralistic
hypothesis.1 We need an account of how all the varieties of religious experi-
ence can be veridical, and his hypothesis is this: “The great post-axial faiths
constitute different ways of experiencing, conceiving, and living in relation
to an ultimate divine Reality which transcends all our varied visions of it”
(Interpretation 236–37).
It seems odd that Hick includes only post-axial religions in his hypoth-
esis. If the reason a pluralistic hypothesis is needed is because it is arbitrary
and irrational to say one’s own religious experience is veridical and all
others’ is delusory, the appropriate pluralistic hypothesis is “All religions
that are based upon religious experience constitute different ways of experienc-
ing, conceiving, and living in relation to an ultimate divine Reality which
transcends all our varied visions of it.” If Hick includes only post-axial reli-
gions in his hypothesis and excludes others in which people have religious
experience, his hypothesis is inadequate. Hick does precisely what he says is
unreasonable. He arbitrarily states that the religious experience that occurs
in a particular type of religion is veridical while the religious experience of
other traditions is not.
To see that Hick is, in fact, excluding religious experience that he
should, by his own reasoning, include in his hypothesis, one can examine
how he defines religious experience. He defines it as “modifications in
the content of consciousness” in which “distinctively religious concepts are
employed” (Interpretation 153). This includes visions and dreams in which
such concepts are employed, as well as hearing voices, having mystical expe-
riences, or having a sense of being in the presence of God or some other
transcendent presence (Interpretation 103, 216).
Hick discusses at great length the religious experience of believers in
post-axial religions. But believers in pre-axial religions also have these sorts
of religious experiences. To see that this is so, one can consider a particular
family of pre-axial religion, the religions of the Native Americans. These
religions are heavily based on visionary experience. The Native Americans
experience spontaneous religious visions, and they also actively seek out
1 Of course, the soundness of this argument for the need for a pluralistic hypothesis can be—and
has been—questioned. But in this paper I am assuming, for the sake of argument, that the argu-
ment is sound.
exclusivisM in hick’s PluRalistic hyPothesis 63
such visions (Lyon 20). During these visions, they hear voices and see spir-
its who communicate with them. William S. Lyon writes:
The Earth People see the visionary experience as a form
of communication with the Creator through divine
intermediaries, called spirits, and thus they attribute
great value to such experiences . . . The vision questing
process is capable of inducing an intense ecstatic trance
that should been [sic] seen as a religious vision in the
truest sense. Certainly the after-effects on the individual
shaman can readily be equated with the after-effects of
the religious vision on saints from other religions . . .
Shamans often speak of the sheer beauty of their vision-
ary experiences, the wonderful feeling it gives them, and
how the world is bathed in a radiant light. (21)
It is also clear that Native Americans “experience religiously,” to use Hick’s
words. Lyon clearly shows that the Native Americans carefully observe
the world around them and experience this world spiritually (20).
These experiences are not unique to Native Americans. For exam-
ple, shamans among Australian aborigines do something called “merging
with the dreaming” (Hume 12), which involves speaking with the spirits of
deceased persons. This communication with the spirit world occurs when
shamans have experiences of leaving their bodies. Also, the Dagara of
Africa practice an initiation rite that involves staring at a tree and waiting
for a vision. Malidoma Patrice Somé of the Dagara writes that during his
initiation he experienced a vision in which the tree he gazed at was replaced
before his eyes with a tall green woman who filled him with transcendent
love and happiness (220–22).
Clearly religious experience is in no way limited to practitioners of
post-axial religion. Considering that members of indigenous societies also
“experience religiously,” they are, according to Hick’s reasoning, rational to
accept this experience and to live their lives accordingly. It follows that it is
unreasonable for us to deny the veridicality of their religious experience as
long as we accept the veridicality of our own experiences, for “the only rea-
son for treating one’s tradition differently from others is the very human,
but not very cogent, reason that it is one’s own” (Interpretation 235). It is
therefore curious that Hick says that the “third possibility” (the other two
possibilities being the view that all religious experience is delusory and
“the dogmatic view that it is all delusory” except for one’s own form of
it) is that “the great post-axial faiths constitute different ways of experienc-
ing, conceiving and living in relation to an ultimate divine Reality which
transcends all our varied visions of it” (Interpretation 235–36, my italics). In
restricting his hypothesis to only the great post-axial faiths, Hick arbitrarily
64 Matthew a. RogeRs
affirms the veridicality of the religious experiences in one form of religion
while denying the veridicality of others. This, of course, is precisely what
his hypothesis is supposed to avoid.
Why does Hick exclude pre-axial religion? The reason seems to be that
these religions are not soteriologically-oriented, and it does seem to be true
that they generally are not. Practitioners of pre-axial religions seem to have,
as Hick says, affirmed earthly life rather than viewing it as “defective, unsat-
isfactory, lacking,” miserable, unreal, trivial, and perverse (Interpretation 28,
32, 36), and thus they apparently did not yearn for salvation or liberation
from life. Though the religions of these people were concerned with ethics,
they were not dedicated to radically transforming people, nor were they
concerned with transcending earthly life to achieve some infinitely prefer-
able future existence (Interpretation 28).
The Lakota, for example, did not conceive of the afterlife as a limit-
lessly better quality of existence. They conceived of it as being similar to
earthly life, the primary difference being that the dead were in no danger of
experiencing misfortunes such as starvation or war (Bonvillain 221). This
would be a better quality of existence, but not necessarily a “limitlessly”
better one, and it would certainly not be a radical “transformation of the
human situation.” Yet Hick’s criterion for the legitimacy of a religion is its
soteriological effectiveness. How “true” a religion is can be judged by how
effectively it converts people to Reality-centeredness and allows them to
achieve an infinitely better state of being (Interpretation 36, 248, 300).
In recognizing that pre-axial religions were not soteriologically-oriented,
Hick likely believes that they did absolutely nothing to promote a transfor-
mation: “[Pre-axial] religious activity is concerned to keep fragile human
life on an even keel; but it is not concerned, as is post-axial religion, with
its radical transformation” (Interpretation 23).
The problem is that Hick never gives any reason for thinking that
soteriological effectiveness is the right criterion for judging the appropri-
ateness of a religion.2 He simply asserts it. His claim is either an arbitrary
assumption or it is based on the following circular reasoning: because
the post-axial religions are all soteriologically effective, the criterion for the
truthfulness of religion is soteriological effectiveness. This is clearly circular
because to use “Post-axial religions are all soteriologically effective” as a
justification for “The criterion for truthfulness is soteriological effective-
ness” is to assume that the soteriological effectiveness present in post-axial
religions is the correct criterion for judging religions. If we do not assume
that soteriological effectiveness is the correct criterion for judging the
2 At least, he does not seem to do so in An Interpretation of Religion. He does, in a later book, attempt
to justify the soteriological criterion. I deal with this attempt in the next section.
exclusivisM in hick’s PluRalistic hyPothesis 65
truthfulness of a religion, we will not view the presence of this feature in
post-axial religions as evidence that they are truthful. Further, if we do not
regard these religions as truthful, we will not be able to use the claim that
they are soteriologically effective as evidence that soteriological effective-
ness is the correct criterion for truthfulness. This kind of reasoning gives
no justification whatsoever for rejecting pre-axial religions as a less appro-
priate response to the Real than post-axial religions.
Thus, Hick’s exclusion of non-soteriologically-oriented religions is
unjustified. Any pluralistic hypothesis that fulfills the need Hick sees for
such a hypothesis would have to include all human religious experience, not
just the experience that has occurred in one particular type of religion.
Objections to My Argument
It is unclear what Hick believes to be the nature of pre-axial religion
and its relationship to the Real. At one point he discusses the “axial shift to
soteriology” as a “discovery of the transcendent” (Interpretation 30), which
suggests that he views pre-axial religion as being delusory and not an experi-
ence of the Real. As I have argued, this violates his own rule. But later he
explains that when members of pre-axial societies felt obligations to their
society, this was because they sensed the existence of the Real (Interpretation
308). This suggests that he believes that pre-axial religion does have at least
some element of experience of the Real.
One could argue that I have been unfair to Hick in claiming that
his hypothesis rejects pre-axial religious experience as delusory. Perhaps a
charitable interpretation requires that I not make such an assertion when
Hick hints that he may believe pre-axial religious experience to be veridical.
But if this is his belief, his hypothesis should be more inclusive. If pre-axial
religious experience is veridical, pre-axial religions also constitute ways of
experiencing, conceiving, and living in relationship to the divine Reality.
So by restricting his theory to the great post-axial faiths—instead of some-
thing like “human religions”—Hick is clearly excluding pre-axial religions
and implying that they are delusory.
There is also an argument that Hick makes which might be taken as
an objection to my argument. In “The Possibility of Religious Pluralism:
A Response to Gavin D’Costa,” Hick defends his exclusion of religions
outside the great post-axial traditions. He claims that in using the soterio-
logical criterion, he is using a criterion which “represents the basic moral
consensus of all the great world faiths. [It is] common to . . . Hinduism,
Judaism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Zoroastrianism, Christianity
and Islam.” He further justifies his position as follows:
66 Matthew a. RogeRs
But why select these particular traditions . . . as providing
the right criterion? The answer arises out of the route
by which the pluralistic hypothesis is arrived at . . . . It
originates within a particular religious tradition—in my
own case Christianity. As a Christian, then, one accepts
that the sense of the presence of God . . . is indeed an
awareness of a divine presence; and one sees as confir-
mation of this the self-evidently valuable and desirable
“fruit of the Spirit” which St. Paul listed as “love, joy,
peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentle-
ness, self-control. . . .
One then becomes aware that there are other great
religious traditions within which people conceive and
experience the Divine/Ultimate/Real differently, but
the moral and spiritual fruits of which nevertheless seem
to be essentially similar to those of Christian faith and
experience. And so one extends to them the basic faith
that their religious experience also is a cognitive response
to a transcendent reality. (Dialogues 172–73)
According to Hick, the reason for selecting particular religions as “provid-
ing the right criterion” lies in the reasoning that leads one to pluralism.
This reasoning is something like the following:
(1) My own religious experience is an authentic cog-
nitive response to a transcendent reality.
(2) There are other religions in which people have
religious experiences that lead them to believe in a
transcendent reality.
(3) Since these religious experiences give them the
same justification for their beliefs that I have for
my own, I should accept that their religions are also
authentic cognitive responses to a transcendent
reality.
According to Hick, “religious experience and its fruits in life cohere;
for if the fruits in this case were hatred, misery, aggression, unkindness,
impatience, violence and lack of self-control, this would lead us to deny
the authenticity of the experience” (Dialogues 173). In other words, if the
“fruits” of my religious experience were these negative things, I would take
this to be a defeater to my belief that (1) is true. I would not believe (1), and
so I would never get to (3). Without this ethical criterion, we would not
accept our own religion in the first place, much less come to be pluralists.
We are therefore justified in using this criterion to judge religions.
exclusivisM in hick’s PluRalistic hyPothesis 67
Hick makes this argument in order to justify the exclusion of such
“religions” as Satanism and Nazism, and this is understandable. The posi-
tion that Satanism and Nazism are authentic responses to the divine reality
is certainly an unattractive one and one that we should avoid. The impor-
tant thing to note is that this argument could not justify the exclusion of
pre-axial religions because the “fruits” of pre-axial religious experience
are not evil (at least in many cases). Even if one wanted to say that they
were, one could not coherently argue that this would lead practitioners
of pre-axial religion to reject their religious experience. Clearly practi-
tioners of pre-axial religion do not deny the validity of their experience;
they accept it. If they denied it, there would never have been any pre-axial
religion. So whether or not Hick is correct that negative “fruits” will lead
one to deny the validity of their religious experience, there is no defeater to
(1). If we arrive at (3), it will be without any justification for using a crite-
rion that excludes pre-axial religion.
It is also important to note here the distinction between ethical and
soteriological criteria. Even if Hick’s argument were sound, it would only
justify using an ethical criterion, not necessarily a soteriological one. Ethics
has to do with what is good and what is right. Soteriology has to do not
just with what is good and right, but also with the notion of salvation and
liberation. Though pre-axial religions are not concerned with soteriology,
they are concerned with ethics. To take just one example, again from Native
Americans, Howard Harrod writes that “religious experience forms moral
attitudes and dispositions” among Native Americans (qtd. in Lyon 21). So
even if we grant Hick’s argument for using the ethical criterion, there is still
no reason to exclude pre-axial religions, despite their lack of soteriological
concern. If we are going to, as Hick suggests, “obey the intellectual Golden
Rule of granting to others a premise on which we rely ourselves” and not
“claim that our own form of religious experience . . . is veridical whilst the
others are not” (Interpretation 235), we must recognize the validity of not
just the great religious traditions, but also pre-axial religions and indeed all
religions that are based upon religious experience.
Conclusion
There is, of course, nothing unique to Hick about overlooking or
discounting pre-axial religions. In the debate about the philosophical prob-
lem of religious diversity, discussion has been limited almost entirely to the
great post-axial traditions. Indigenous religions have, as George Mavrodes
says of polytheism, “not gotten a fair shake in the philosophical casino;
indeed, [they have] hardly gotten any shake at all” (139). The assumption
68 Matthew a. RogeRs
seems to be that the only religions worth taking seriously are the great post-
axial religions of our own civilized culture.
This assumption needs to be challenged. Hick’s argument for plu-
ralism is interesting in that it shows exactly why we should challenge the
assumption and then fails to challenge it. Yet the argument is still signifi-
cant; Hick correctly identifies that practitioners of other religions have the
same justification for their beliefs that one has for his own beliefs. This
shows us that one needs to take other religions seriously instead of ignoring
or dismissing them.
However, if the Christian needs to take the Hindu’s vision of Vishnu
seriously, if the Hindu needs to take Muhammad’s hearing the voice of
God seriously, and if the Muslim needs to take the Buddhist’s mystical
experience seriously, then there is no reason that excuses any of these faiths
from taking the Dagara’s vision of the green woman or the Lakota’s vision
of spirits seriously.
The typical oversight of indigenous religions among philosophers is
especially unfortunate given what these religions may have to teach us. Just
as the teachings of the Buddha teach us about serenity, and just as the sto-
ries of Christ’s ministry teach us about compassion, indigenous religions
may contain their own valuable teachings. This is something that Hick
does recognize. He writes that in archaic religions there was “an affirmation
of earthly life and a natural acceptance of death which have been largely
lost since the discovery of sin and salvation, avidya and illumination,” as
well as “a sense of continuity with other forms of life and of the living unity
of nature, which might restrain our ecologically destructive uses of the envi-
ronment,” and “a sense of the moral reality of community, which might
moderate our now extreme western individualism” (Interpretation 28–29).
The potentially valuable teachings of archaic religions as well as the power-
ful religious experiences that followers undergo give philosophers ample
reason to give pre-axial religions a closer look.
Works Cited
Bonvillain, Nancy. Native Nations: Cultures and Histories of Native North
America. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
Hick, John. Dialogues in the Philosophy of Religion. New York: Palgrave,
2001.
———. An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent. 2nd
ed. New Haven, CT: Yale UP, 2004.
Hume, Lynne. “On the Unsafe Side of the White Divide: New Perspectives
on the Dreaming of Australian Aborigines.” Anthropology of
Consciousness 10.1 (1999): 1–15.
Lyon, William. “The Visionary Experience in North American Shamanism.”
Anthropology of Consciousness 2.1–2 (1991): 20–24.
Mavrodes, George. “Polytheism.” The Philosophical Challenge of Religious
Diversity. Ed. Philip L. Quinn and Kevin Meeker. New York: Oxford
UP, 2000. 139–60.
Somé, Malidoma Patrice. Of Water and the Spirit: Ritual, Magic, and Initiation
in the Life of an African Shaman. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons,
1994.
Ward, Keith. “Truth and Diversity of Religions.” The Philosophical Challenge
of Religious Diversity. Ed. Philip L. Quinn and Kevin Meeker. New
York: Oxford UP, 2000. 109–25.