AporiaVol. 14 number 1—2004
Disowning Mutual Identity:
The Case of Spirit-Murdering the Other
in Law and Society
STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
he most important moves made in philosophy or indeed in any sort
T
of thinking are the most basic and often the most metaphysical.
Thinking even briefly about the basic confusions that we so fre-
quently hold about seemingly simple subjects like who “we” are and who
“they” are can give us alarming insights into important problems. These
problems underlie American social perspectives on those people and
groups who are relegated to the margins of socio-political worth. So many
of the legal problems tied to the ideas of empowerment and disenfran-
chisement in terms of race, creed, sexual orientation, gender, and so forth
are partially based on poor metaphysics. Specifically, there are problems
both with how society understands identity and how people react when
they experience the impact of novel experiences and their ways of thinking
about the world. For many, it is a fundamental misunderstanding of per-
sonal identity and, by proxy, claims of “reasonability” that underlie fear and
hatred of the social “Other,” that marginal group with which “we” are not
familiar and of which “we” are so often afraid. Cruelly principled exclusion
builds on the cracked foundations of these misunderstandings of identity
and rationality. A clear unraveling and reconstructing of some identity
claims through case studies and truly human experience may yield some
practical steps towards untying bigotry from our societies.
Steven J. Schwartz is a senior at Creighton University majoring in philosophy and theol-
ogy. He plans to teach theology and eventually attend graduate school.
74 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
To begin, then, we must answer the question, “What exactly is the
mistake made about personal identity and reasonability?” or, rather, “What
are the mistakes?” There are probably too many to discuss here in any
detail. However, considering the context of this examination, two imme-
diately stand out against all others: the skeptical mistake and the deific mis-
take. Both of these are strongly influenced by the development of
Enlightenment rationality and, while not attributable to any specific
philosopher, seem to be implicit in Descartes and some of his later cohorts
in the modern project.
Modern society’s laws and social tendencies formed in great part
around the central tenets of these principles, and as such, they play out in
a number of ways, a conclusion that will be clear later on. In law, we see
their rumblings under qualifications such as “his belief must be a reason-
able belief; such a belief as a reasonable man would entertain if he applied
his mind.”1What it is to utter a statement like “This is a reasonable belief
[action, thought]” must be defined, as must be the notion of the personal
identity of the person who utters such a thing.
We begin with the latter of these: personal identity claims. This starts
with philosophical Skepticism. Ancient Skepticism, especially the original
Pyrrhonean version, is almost invincible (or perhaps irrelevant) because of
its unwillingness to accept any undefined, basic principles with which to
work. This leads to problems in philosophical analysis: the Skeptics break
everything down into their smallest component parts in order to analyze
each notion and part separately, and this analysis fails if no “primitive
notions” exist. More modern versions of Skepticism also break everything
apart into almost meaningless entities and then claim that they cannot be
adequately glued back together. This is the heart of the skeptical mistake,
and though there are few, if any, Pyrrhoneans about in the modern world,
the tradition of overly acute analytical dissection is a modern ritual
whether or not it is always labeled as Skepticism with a capital “S.”
1 Regina v. Morgan524.
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 75
In terms of modern notions of identity, this skeptical mistake func-
tions as disowning various types of interconnectedness inherent in per-
sonal identity notions. The solipsism of this thinking may occur at a
number of levels, from alienation in two-way relationships to the alienation
of group relationships. The basis for this philosophical solipsism is a func-
tion of the notion that we all have single, developing selves that are not
affected (and do not affect) other things—including people—in any relevant
way. This is perhaps an overstatement of the point I want to make here, but
it is an important one. The idea that the self is so internal to a person that
the world cannot affect it and vice versa implies that all things outside of
the self can be manipulated only in a trivial or non-essential way. We can-
not change the identity of anyone or anything because we do not have any
“real” contact with that thing—its true essence, substance, or form is
beyond the handling of its concreteness, accidents, or instantiation.
In terms of personal identity, this makes a “me” and the “world,”
where I am the knower, the cogito, the “in,” and where the world is the
unknown, the other, and the “out.”2Of course, very few people live in such
a way as to make this seem entirely plausible. Our family members begin to
shape our thinking, helping us grow into the people we are; teachers edu-
cate us, a formative and changing process; our community fosters and
shapes us, helping solidify (or undermine) the values we learn from our
families and educators. In practical terms, solipsism can be taken only so
far, as the road of broadening perspective is traveled through life.3For those
whom we commonly identify as bigots, though, there is an abrupt halt or
misstep somewhere along that road. At some point, the personal identity
of the cogito and its familiar group starkly closes to the Other. It is a
healthy thing for a person to have a secure identity that is confidently dis-
tinct from all others, but it is dangerous for everyone when groups of peo-
2William James also draws this strong distinction between self and not-self in The Principles of
Psychology, but his charge does not carry the doubt of all-but-the-self that the Cartesian model exempli-
fies. Thus, James avoids solipsism. See James 44–110.
3 Incidentally, this may be the type of thinking that we see in Lawrence Kohlberg and Carol Gilligan’s psy-
chology of moral development: people increase their levels of awareness of the outside world—other peo-
ple, beings, etc.—as they mature morally.
76 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
ple feel so distinct from other groups that they forget what they share in
common.4This is the denial of a mutual identity, and history shows us time
and again the cruelty engendered by such disowning in society. The ulti-
mate function of the skeptical mistake is to put a gulf between in-groups
and out-groups on the metaphysical level of personal identity; this split is
in fact so great that the in-group renounces any claim to the identity of the
Other, a concept which begins to develop in mythologized and demonized
terms.
The second part of mistaken identities is the deific mistake, the work-
ing of which can be seen operating when the idea of “reasonable belief” is
considered. If one takes the preceding sense of the individualized cogito for
granted,5then the notion of acting “reasonably” refers to one’s own reason.
For example, when a person says, “That is totally unreasonable,” she really
means to express the idea, “I cannot picture myself thinking, doing, or say-
ing that.” Such a thing is beyond what she considers conceivable for her. It
is beyond her understanding of the world, which is the only Reason that
she can really know with the basically noninteractive self previously
described. Taking into account the fact that all people do live and grow
within groups and communities, the consideration must be broad. Reason
then refers to the widest possible group with whom one identifies, so that
“reasonability” refers to characteristic traits of a group to which one
belongs.
It is not clear that this thinking is a misstep, though, or why it should
be given such a grandiose title as the “deific mistake.” The real
Enlightenment error that one can trace through the short history of the
secular world is the quasi-ritualistic worship of Reason as such. Reason is
hailed to be the trump card of the modern world, as that which provides all
answers in a parallel sense to the answers offered by God through revelation
in the Christian tradition. When Reason becomes the all-powerful, and
rationality is the characteristic of possessing reason and is often based on
little more than one’s personal experience of the world, then there is a
4It remains to be seen what exactly this is; it is discussed below.
5 . . . which I wholeheartedly think that most people do.
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 77
danger of groups implying that deific Reason is on their side and their side
only. A group begins to see Reason as belonging essentially to itself when
it puts an impenetrable blockade between itself and the Other. Reason is
forced into the boundaries of the group’s own beliefs and experiences.
Regrettably, this mistake frequently occurs, leading those who are already
victims of the skeptical mistake even farther from identifying with those
who are perceived as disowned or fundamentally unrelated. This explana-
tion gives a vague outline of the processes that create the nonrational Other
in society, and it is time to look at examples of the consequences that follow
from it.
These principles are best understood in terms of case studies, how-
ever cursory. It may be argued by some that the circumstances of margin-
alized groups are improving in the world, and that their diverse experiences
should be left well enough alone to flourish as they will. I respond that
these groups will not achieve true parity until we recognize all parties as
equally valid, equally rational, and equally identifiable as persons.
Examples demonstrate that some of these groups still lack the relevant par-
ity.
One group of Other in society is the Gay-Lesbian-Bisexual-
Transgendered community. This Otherness has been clearly demostrated
in recent years, as in the case of the Matthew Shepard murder. A gay col-
lege student beaten and tied to a fence in Wyoming in 1998 fueled a
nationwide controversy that spawned a new interest in hate crime legis-
lation in the years immediately following his murder, which was clearly
linked to homophobia. Shepard was, by most accounts, tortured. The short
account of the beating runs something like this: “[Aaron] McKinney and
an accomplice posed as homosexuals and lured Shepard from a bar, drove
him to the outskirts of Laramie, tied him to a fence, savagely pistol-
whipped him and left him to die” of exposure in freezing temperatures.6
Shepard’s brutal death brings the element of the Other explicitly to
light. More than just a murder, this is a hate crime. Shepard seems to have
6Kenworthy A2.
78 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
been singled out for this kind of treatment because of his homosexuality;
where another man might have suffered a beating at the hands of these
assailants, a gay man was tied to a fence in the wilderness and left to die.
Patricia Williams observes that in the murder of a civil rights activist who
was stabbed thirty-nine times, “the point was not just murder but some-
thing beyond.”7Williams identifies this variously but finally settles on the
term “spirit murder,” an umbrella term under which we might accurately
describe any manner of hate crime. No matter the term, the sense is the
same: one commits a crime against some Other because of that Otherness.
Williams writes:
I wondered for a long time what it was that would not die, .
. . what sort of thing would not die with the body but lived on
in the mind of the murderer. Perhaps . . . what the murderer
was trying to kill was a part of his own mind’s image, a part of
himself and not a real other.8
Aaron McKinney, by this logic, was trying to kill what he shared with the
Other-ness in Shepard,9though usually we might think that McKinney was
trying to destroy that which he could not understand. I think that the truth
lies somewhere in the middle of these—while possibly identifying with
Shepard’s sexual inclinations on even a subconscious level, McKinney
could not recognize an affirming self-identity cooperating with those incli-
nations.
A second example comes directly from Williams’s chapter on the con-
cept of spirit murder. Her paradigmatic example is that of the Howard
Beach incident, which occurred in 1986. The car in which three African
American men were riding stalled on a freeway that passes near an afflu-
ent white neighborhood of Howard Beach in New York City. The men
7Williams 72.
8Ibid.
9 His attorney, during the trial, asserted that McKinney had homosexual experiences as a child, making
this all the more plausible. For one version of this reports, see “Gay Panic.”
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 79
walked through the neighborhood until they found an all-night pizza shop,
from which they were chased and brutally beaten by a group of white
teenagers. The kids killed one of the men and permanently blinded
another in one eye.10 When the story hit the papers, a number of Other-
identifying questions and statements began circulating, especially amongst
the affluent whites of Howard Beach. “We’re a strictly white neighbor-
hood”; “they had to be starting trouble”; “we ain’t racial, we just don’t
want to get robbed.”11 Such comments implicitly identify African
Americans as troublemakers, thieves, and naturally vicious people.
There is a lot going on in this case in terms of the Other, and it is
internally consistent with the Shepard murder. We see the empowered
group (the affluent white people, in this case) treating the marginalized
group (the African Americans) in a dehumanizing way. In the Howard
Beach case, though, the dehumanization goes beyond that of the Matthew
Shepard murder because public opinion does not convict the New York
teens the way it does Aaron McKinney. In fact, Williams’s telling of the
story highlights incidences of Howard Beach residents actually dismissing
the incident as some kind of natural reaction to the presence of black citi-
zens in their community. Perhaps Howard Beach residents come short of
actually condoning the violence, but they are certainly not as disgusted or
enraged as we might expect them to be.
Hate crimes are dissociative in nature, a public consequence of an
internalized belief in a cavernous ontological gap between social groups. As
in the Shepard murder, this is spirit murder, a crime committed against
one person that is directed toward that person’s (out-) group. These men’s
status of “being African American” contributed to the severity of the beat-
ings in such a way as to make us wonder if this brutality was really directed
at the men themselves, at African Americans in general, or at the internal
conflict between learned fear and intuited identity. I argue that all three are
equally correct, each level more discreet and pervasive than the previous.
10 Williams, ch. 4, “Teleology on the Rocks (or spirit-murdering the messenger).”
11Ibid. 58–59.
80 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
Hence, while many whites might have thought that this incident was with-
out racist (or racial) motivation and was rather just the meanness of local
kids, African Americans thought in a broader context that these men were
symbols of their entire community. The men, both as individual victims
and victims-as-symbols of their African American community, suffered the
consequences of an overactive boundary-drawing tendency that is learned
solipsism, a tragic effect of a defective self-identity.
Perpetrators of hate crimes seemingly recognize that they do share
something with their victims—some kind of identity—and their hate crimes
are motivated by just such a thought. The skeptical mistake about personal
identity tells us that we share nothing with them. However, this line of rea-
soning is inconsistent with the experience of the world. Some people can-
not accept any sharing of identity between themselves and the Other and
so try to stamp out the Other altogether, both in the specific victim and
as the victim-as-symbol of the Other. The spirit murderer is forced to cri-
sis by the belief that what he has learned is right and that his intuition of
interconnectedness with the Other must therefore be wrong. It is then
that the deific mistake of holding Reason (the experienced rationality of
one’s group or accepted authority) above oneself and one’s own internal
moral compass pushes the angry or confused to violence.
Moving from the social context towards the realm of legal philosophy,
we can see a kind of second victimization taking place at the level of victim
responsibility in both the Matthew Shepard murder and the Howard Beach
beatings. Aaron McKinney’s defense attorney claimed that
Shepard, not McKinney, was the aggressor the night he died. .
. . [He] made an unwanted advance towards McKinney when
he put his hand on the defendant’s groin and stuck his
tongue in McKinney’s ear. . . . These alleged acts sent
McKinney into a rage that was aggravated by his abuse of alco-
hol and methamphetamines.12
12“McKinney’s Defense Says Unwanted Advance Spurred Shepard’s Fatal Beating.”
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 81
This “gay panic” defense was later dismissed by the trial judge for various
reasons, and the public generally scoffed at it. The idea of “gay panic”
reflects the belief that this murder was somehow Shepard’s fault, that he
was the aggressor the night he died. Behind this defense is the claim,
“Aaron McKinney was acting as any reasonable person might, though his
reaction was heightened by drug use.”13This, though, is not how any rea-
sonable person might act. It is rather how a bigot or a severely confused
person might act, and the judge in McKinney’s trial recognized this.
In the Howard Beach case, this idea of victim responsibility is taken
to extremes. The Howard Beach residents’ statements questioning why the
victims entered the neighborhood in the first place presumes a type of
guilt. Williams identifies these segregationist attitudes explicitly: “Everyone
who lives here is white. No black could live here. . . . No black is ever up to
any good.”14African Americans are the Other, and they are now here, and
the Other is not good. African Americans are from the urban jungle—they
are animals.15 This is the kind of demonization that translates into our
opinions and courtrooms, as Williams notes in the case of Bernard Goetz’s
shooting of four teenage African Americans:
The public overwhelmingly presumed his innocence. . . . The
public devoured, ex post facto, stories about the deviant behav-
ior of the victims in this case. The victims’ criminal propensi-
ties—allegations ranging from rape to robbery—were used . . . to
13There is another way to read the articles describing the idea of “gay panic.” At times, McKinney’s attor-
ney suggests not that “gay panic” is a reasonable thing for all people to experience, but that McKinney’s
nuanced and “confusing” experiences with homosexuality make gay panic a reasonable defense for him.
If this is the case, then we would still be allowing the court to say that gay people, as a group in society,
occasionally so enrage some people that they can reasonably be expected to react violently, even if that
violence is not condoned. This is a more apologetic, though still harmful, view of the situation, which
I nonetheless think is a mistaken rendering of the views that McKinney actually stated during his trial.
14Williams 59.
15Ibid. 74–75.
82 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
show why the four young men deserved to be the objects of
intent to kill.16
The same sort of thing happened in the Howard Beach case and continues
to happen to groups of Other in the United States’ judicial process.17Those
who are perceived as Other are punished through social marginalization.
Victim responsibility claims are a second, more stylized assault on the
humanity of those who are already victims of crime.
This spirit murder is committed by any legal system that allows us to
say that the victim of a crime deserves what happens to her simply because
of who she is. This is parallel to accusing someone of being so offensive
that the person, in herself, is inciting or panic causing. Because of who she
is, anything she says can be construed as “fighting words.”18People them-
selves become statements and are offensive to the in-groups for whom they
form the “out.” It could be argued, and I would agree, that this is part of
what plays into the myth of “reverse racism” that Wise identifies as being
a white backlash against affirmative action.19 We might imagine, for
instance, Bull Conner thinking in just this way when encountering the
Birmingham protests, that the protesters in front of him were offensive
because of who they were and for being who they were publicly. Publicity
has a lot to do with these issues: just as free speech, free assembly, and free
press are inherently designed to protect citizens who desire to express them-
selves publicly, so also has marginalization to do with being public. Public,
as we might imagine by drawing on a number of Williams’s claims, is deter-
mined by the empowered, the wealthy, the white, such that being African
16Ibid. 77.
17 Another clear example of this occurs in rape trials, e.g., State v. Rusk(in Legal Philosophy519–525).
Female rape victims are asked to “prove” that they were not giving any consensual signals, and so forth.
This, until recently, could be marked by something as simple as wearing a short skirt on a date with the
accused. Some rape victims are accused of somehow “asking for” the violence done to them and often
have to humiliate themselves in proving that they did not want sexual intercourse with the accused.
18 Feinberg discusses the various kinds of expression that are limited under the law, 306–325.
19Wise 34–36, et alibi.
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 83
American in public is being African American in the white world and in
the white press. Being “inciting” means walking through an all white
neighborhood in the middle of night while being African American;
speaking “fighting words” is simply being a man who winks at another
man in a Wyoming bar.
From here the issue explodes into hundreds of pieces and avenues,
with room to mention only a few, those with regard to changes we might
make in our law and ourselves. First, it seems that we must correct the
metaphysical mistake lying at the root of some of these problems. It can be
accomplished in a few ways and in most major metaphysical systems. For
instance, the physicalist could trot out arguments to the effect that we all
share identity because we are composed differently on the atomic level at
every second of our lives. Our identity is in flux, and we share this physical
identity with every other person on the planet, who is also composed of the
same stuff as we are on a basic level. The physicalist could also argue along
the lines of a “scattered totality” of humanity—all humans are humans in
one body of humanity that can physically be mapped according to the loca-
tion of each person in the universe. And so on. It seems that a number of
systems could correct the metaphysical identity issues at least to the satis-
faction of avoiding spirit murder by affirming some kind of unity or recog-
nition of humanity. The task of education is to develop more sophisticated
thinking throughout all young people, and these ways of thinking must try
to better describe the world and the “Other” and reach them better than
many of the current avenues.
Kevin Graham’s description of Patricia Hill Collins’s controlling
images adds another dimension to this picture and the picture of what
education must constitute. The controlling image is
similar to a stereotype insofar as it is a demeaning, belittling
image. . . . Controlling images shape the perceptions and
expectations of dominant group members about members of
84 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
subordinate groups, and they justify the use of social and economic
power to force subordinate group members to fill the roles.20
First, this explanation highlights the inherent domination and subordina-
tion of the out-group minority by the in-group majority. In other words, the
issue is put into terms that more accurately describe the experience of
being Other. More importantly, however, we can see that a real revision of
education is not a matter entirely for schools and able teachers. This is a
call for all of society to become able educators by becoming sensitive to,
confronting, and finally dismantling hurtful and offensive controlling
images. For proof that these images really do play out in deeply painful
ways, return to Aaron McKinney, the Howard Beach incident, the Goetz
slayings. For McKinney, the controlling image was that of the flamboyant
and promiscuous fag trying to convert the straight guys, an image he made
clear in the gay panic defense. For Howard Beach residents, the African
American in their neighborhood were clearly just hoodlums. For Bernard
Goetz, the teenagers whom he massacred were wild animals. If more evi-
dence is needed to consider controlling images as a part of everyday life,
momentarily consider the meaning and implications of the term “jungle
fever.” Malformed identity is shot through with these images, and we must
protect both ourselves and our youth from them, even at great expense.21
On the legal level, there are changes already in the process. For
instance, some weakly worded hate laws are becoming stronger yearly.
Though some argue that these unequally affect minorities, hate crime leg-
islation is a first step towards publicly asserting that as a society we reject
bigotry in all of its forms, beginning with interpersonal violence. Further
steps must be taken to reduce the harm done by social systems, which con-
tinue to perpetrate the greatest violence on the Other. These social systems
continue to allow the kind of hate speech that drive gay youth into an
unhealthy subculture just as they continue to allow stylized violence against
20 Graham 51, emphasis added.
21This is a natural segue into the topic of reparation thought, but it will not be considered in this paper.
For an introduction, see McGary chs. 5–8.
DISOWNINGMUTUALIDENTITY 85
women under the guise of “entertainment.”22Williams writes, “We need to
elevate spirit murder to the conceptual—if not punitive—level of a capital
moral offense.”23These systems will not change until there is a fundamen-
tal shift towards the acceptance of the Other as valuable because of differ-
ences and equal because of what is shared.24 We do not live in a utopian
society, and these attitude shifts are unlikely to take full form for a very
long time, but the attempt to protect traditionally marginalized groups is
the beginning of an education process that may end in some kind of parity
as a rejection of the solipsistic identity mistake.
Further, the “reasonability” standards that Kim Scheppele suggests
might combat the deific mistake concerning what it is to be rational.25Such
standards require a greater consciousness of surrounding social systems in
the legal realm as opposed to the “‘view from nowhere’ or the apparently
point-of-viewless point of view” that denies “a multicultural society [in
which there] is no longer a single unassailable truth, but plural and various
truths.”26 Scheppele recognizes the deific mistake for what it is: the eleva-
tion of one point-of-view above all others; this point-of-view calls itself
objective, but it really seems to be coming from the empowered group of
society. In certain cases, at certain points, it becomes imperative to intro-
duce nuanced standards of reasonability, which include not only the per-
spectives of diverse populations, but also those of all victims.27 Again, a
great deal of work must be done in this area to properly flesh out
Scheppele’s suggested system, and, as she asserts, this would be “a radical
departure from the criminal law.”28Such a drastic overhaul may be neces-
sary for the social system in which we live to do some kind of work towards
a true equality amongst diverse perspectives.
22MacKinnon 11. (“Entertainment” does not occur on this page, but the topic is discussed.)
23Williams 78.
24See John Stuart Mill on this topic in On Libertych. 3.
25Scheppele 514–518.
26Ibid. 514.
27The law “customarily considers the victim to be just another witness at the trial and which privileges
the perspective of the defendant through the mens rearequirement.” Ibid. 517.
28Ibid.
86 STEVENJ. SCHWARTZ
A final note on the Other and the empowered group. The empow-
ered seems to circumscribe itself in terms of negative space; the empowered
does not seem to have a specific and readily identifiable identity because it
only defines itself according to, for instance, being nonblack or nongay,
nonfemale and nonpoor.29Having identity based on negative properties is
not to have any identity at all, and so it seems that in-group identity is
intrinsically tied with notions of Otherness. Power of identity then is not
something truly held by an in-group, but by the out-group, and so the in-
group struggles to convince itself otherwise by affecting other avenues of
disownership and marginalization. Thus, in the end, the cruelty of spirit
murder might be a response to the fear that we are not the empowered,
even though we do everything we can to convince ourselves otherwise.
Hence, the totally nebulous form that the in-group takes is Other-denying
on one level, but to the extent that it is an Other-defining act it is ultimately
self-denying, reckless, and futile.
29Of course these paradigms shift according to the specific in-group in question.
ARTICLETITLE
References
Feinberg, Joel. “Limits to the Free Expression of Opinion.” Philosophy of
Law 6th ed. Ed. Joel Feinberg and Jules Coleman. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth/Thompson Learning, 2000. 306–325.
“Gay Panic.” Salon.com. http://www.salon.com/news/feature/1999 /10/
26/trial/index.html. (2 May 2003).
Graham, Kevin. “Autonomy, Individualism, and Social Justice.” Journal of
Value Inquiry36 (2002): 43–57.
James, William. Principles of Psychology. In Bruce Wilshire, William James:
The Essential Writings. Albany: SUNY Press, 1984.
Kenworthy, Tom. “McKinney Avoids Death Sentence.” Washington Post. 5
November 1999. A2.
MacKinnon, Catherine. Only Words. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1993.
McGary, Howard. Race and Social Justice. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999.
“McKinney’s Defense Says Unwanted Advance Spurred Shepard’s Fatal
Beating.” Court TV Online. http://courttv-web3.courttv. com/
archive/trials/mckinney/102599_ctv.html. (2 May 2003).
Regina v. Morgan. In Philosophy of Law 6th ed. Ed. Joel Feinberg and Jules
Coleman. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thompson Learning, 2000.
523–525.
Scheppele, Kim Lane. “The Reasonable Woman.” Philosophy of Law6th ed.
Ed. Joel Feinberg and Jules Coleman. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth/Thompson Learning, 2000. 514–518.
State v. Rusk. In Philosophy of Law 6th ed. Ed. Joel Feinberg and Jules
Coleman. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thompson Learning, 2000.
519–525.
Williams, Patricia J. The Alchemy of Race and Rights. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1991.
Wise, Tim J. Little White Lies: The Truth about Affirmative Action and “Reverse
Discrimination.”New Orleans: Loyola University Twomey Center for
Peace through Justice, 1995.