AporiaVol. 12 number 1—2002
Transcendence over Cultural Politics, or Why I
Don’t Agree with Rorty
ROBERT F. SCHWARTZ
“To head toward a star—this only”1
RICHARD Rorty and Hubert Dreyfus have long fostered a healthy
mutual disagreement. Dreyfus reads his favorite thinkers as pre-
senting “the way things really are,” whereas Rorty sees philosophers
only as “recontextualizers—people who do not reveal the essential nature
of anything, but simply tell you how things look when rearranged.”2 Such
contextualizations might prove purposeful or even enlightening, but Rorty
insists that we do not need to choose between them. If we choose between
two descriptions and elevate one to the status of “the way things really
are,” then we misunderstand what we’re doing when we communicate.
This position captures the essence of Rorty’s recent paper “Cultural
Politics and the Question of the Existence of God.” In his paper, Rorty
argues for the ultimate conclusion that we should take our practices and
beliefs for what they are—
manifestations of sociopolitical aims—and quit trying to place them in a
larger context that forms the background of all possible practices. Or, to
put this thesis another way, cultural politics ought to replace ontology
from the foundation up.
A project to replace ontology and all of its affiliated areas of study
sounds suspiciously like Rudolf Carnap’s Überwindung der Metaphysik—a
project that will have Heideggerians and other like-minded philosophers up
1 Heidegger, Poetry 4.
Rob Schwartz is a senior philosophy major at Brigham Young University. He will
study in Poland next year as a Fulbright Scholar. This essay won third place in the
ROBSCHWARTZ
in arms. But Rorty’s approach is surprisingly disarming. If accused of
doing violence to ontology, he would probably shrug his shoulders and
say that ontology, of course, has its place. That place, however, does not
extend so far as to envelop and explain all other areas of philosophical
discourse. Ontology is merely one contextualization among many, and
anyone who claims otherwise does violence to other traditions. Like all
other traditions, says Rorty, ontology boils down to cultural politics—but
what does he mean when he says this and how does he come to such a
controversial conclusion?
Rorty explains that “the term ‘cultural politics’ covers, among
other things, arguments about what words to use.”3 For instance, when
the United States Supreme Court has ruled on different occasions to keep
prayer, religious instruction, and other God-talk out of public schools,
they were engaging in cultural politics. Ostensibly, the nation will move
nearer to realizing its sociopolitical aims as embodiedin the first amend-
ment if its citizens limit certain linguistic practices. But cultural politics
extends beyond mere word usage. Fundamentally, cultural politics
involves the effort to eliminate entire topics of discourse. We could say
that the issue doesn’t ultimately center around praying in a public class-
room; rather, the whole concept of believing in God and thus dividing
society along seemingly arbitrary lines ought to be avoided.
At this point we hear the following objection: “It doesn’t matter if
you stop talking about God or religions, they still exist!” Rorty replies that
the question “Should we talk about such things?” and the question “Do
such things exist?” are interchangeable in the instance of religions, God,
race, and other matters of cultural politics.4God and religion exist because
we talk about them, not vice versa. Rorty admits that there are instances in
which it seems odd to mix the question of “what is” with the question of
“what we should talk about.”
The question of whether to talk about neutrons, for example, seems
a strictly scientific question. That is why people who say that physi-
cists should never have investigated radioactivity, or speculated about
the possibility of splitting the atom, are accused of confusing science
2 Rorty, Heidegger, Foreword xii.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
with politics.5
Thus, in a Rortian mindset, talk of God the Creator is political while talk
of the Big Bang is scientific, or nonpolitical. ‘Race’ is political but ‘genes’
are not. The difference is that in the former examples, the questions
“Should we talk about it?” and “Does it exist?” are interchangeable and
thus matters of cultural politics, and in the latter examples these questions
do not overlap.
In light of these distinctions we are left to ask the central question of
cultural politics: How do we know when it is inappropriate to say, “We bet-
ter talk about it because it exists?” How can we divide culture into areas
where cultural politics is relevant and areas where it is not? Rorty marshals
the support of William James and J. S. Mill in implying that the answer to
these questions lies in “human happiness” and a “better world.” The point
at which something hinders human happiness and doesn’t make for a bet-
ter world is the point at which we should leave off conversation of that
thing. Our objectors observe that the controversy should not center
around happiness but around what exists—ontology, after all, precedes cul-
tural politics. Rorty says “nonsense.” The “truth” and “reality” that we
associate with ontology, God, religion, and so forth exist purely for the
sake of social practice, not the other way around. This paper ultimately
aims at evaluating how Rorty’s reliance on the thought of William James
and Robert Brandom ultimately affects his central claim that cultural pol-
itics replaces ontology. However, now that we grasp the general meaning of
Rorty’s anti-ontological claim, we must outline the arguments that he gives
in its support.
I. Replacing Ontology with Cultural Politics
A. ROBERTBRANDOMANDTHEONTOLOGICALPRIMACYOFTHESOCIAL
Rorty claims that Robert Brandom’s writings provide the “best
weapons” for defending his pragmatic views.6 “Brandom presents
Heidegger as putting forward the doctrine of ‘the ontological primacy of
3 Rorty, Cultural Politics1.
ROBSCHWARTZ
the social.’ This primacy consists in the fact that ‘all matters of authority
or privilege, in particular epistemicauthority, are matters of social practice,
and not objective matters of fact.’”7 To support this doctrine, Brandom
divides society’s structure of authority into:
1. Supreme individual authority, as in the realm of feelings and per-
sonal thoughts.
2. Supreme nonhuman (scientific) authority, as when a lie detector
determines whether an individual is guilty of some misdeed.
3. Cultural Politics, which occurs when “society does not delegate [to
individual or scientific authority], but retains the right to decide for
itself.”8 Moreover, cultural politics determines when and to what
extent individual and nonhuman authority come into play.
Parceling out societal authority in this way leads us to question
whether society must acknowledge any authority beyond itself. Brandom’s
answer to this question is a resounding “no.” Rorty points out that
Brandom answers “no” because authority that anyone tries to attribute to
a superhuman entity can be explained sociologically. As we previously saw,
the Big Bang and evolution can supplant talk of God Creator. Consensus
under “ideal” communicative conditions renders obsolete parlance con-
cerning God as a law-giver. If we recognize this, says Brandom, then we see
that appeals to something beyond (e.g., reality, truth, God) “are disguised
moves in the game of cultural politics. That is what they must be,
because…it is the only game in town.”9
This view of cultural politics as “the only game in town” makes
sense when we consider that those who appeal to something beyond
always appear to be forwarding some social agenda. And there will
always be people who wish to oppose such individuals’ agenda, assert-
ing their own authority instead. Brandom and Rorty insightfully
observe that,
4 Rorty, Cultural Politics3.
5 Rorty, Cultural Politics3.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
Only when the community decides to adopt one faith rather than
another, or the court decides in favor of one side rather than another,
or the scientific community in favor of one theory rather than
another, does the idea of ‘authority’ become applicable. The so-called
‘authority’ of anything other than the community (or some person or
thing or expert culture authorized by the community to make deci-
sions in its name) can only be mere table-thumping.10
B. THEAPPEALTOSENSORYEXPERIENCE
ASANOBJECTIONTOSOCIALPRIMACY
Empiricism, says Rorty, has the potential to throw a wrench into the
works of Brandom’s clean, explicable system. Empiricists claim that we
can break free from society’s authority and make direct contact with reality
through our senses. “This view has encouraged the belief that Europe
finally got in touch with reality when scientists like Galileo had the
courage to believe the evidence of their senses rather than bowing to the
authority of Aristotle and the Catholic Church.”11 Brandom views this
empiricist position as misguided for two main reasons:
1. Empiricists fail to recognize that all awareness is a linguistic affair.
Any perceptual report must be made in the language of some community.
2. Others in the community either believe or disbelieve given reports
based on previously established expectations. Such expectations are a
product of cultural politics; i.e., what society has decided it will believe.
Rorty and Brandom conclude that sensory experience provides no
ground for saying what we should talk about in relation to what exists.
Socially established norms determine which experiences people will
believe, and thus belief in sensory experience is in the end a matter of cul-
tural politics.
C. CONSCIOUSNESSANDTHELIMITSOFCULTURALPOLITICS
If sensory experience also fades into cultural politics, what about our
6 Rorty, Cultural Politics9.
ROBSCHWARTZ
consciousness, which corresponds to personal authority, the first of
Brandom’s three spheres of authority, where religious experience comes
into play? We already know that cultural politics delimits the area in which
personal authority has meaning, so our question must be posed as follows,
“What limits the extent to which cultural politics can dictate what is
appropriate to talk about with regard to our consciousness?” After all,
when we consider consciousness in relation to cultural politics, our God-
talk is not the only thing at stake; we also seem to risk losing talk about
our trip to the store yesterday, the chair across the room, and even the
ground beneath our feet. Rorty acknowledges that, “There are…limits to
society’s ability to talk things into or out of existence.”12In response to this
concern, he sets out what he considers to be three Brandomian limits:
1. Transcendental limits, which are set by the need to talk about
something, especially objects.
2. Practical limits, which are determined by the transcultural need to
distinguish up from down, true from false, and so forth.
3. Cultural limits that are set by society’s existing norms that we men-
tioned previously.
Our need to talk about objects attests to Rorty’s transcendental
limits, as does the necessity of talking about the world in terms of space,
time, and causality. Without these and other affiliated concepts, we
would not function as human beings. Are the concepts of God or ontol-
ogy likewise indispensable? The answer comes back again, “no.” For
Brandom and Rorty:
A prioriphilosophical inquiry into what exists is exhausted once the
question “Why are there objects?” has been answered. Giving a tran-
scendental argument for the existence of objects exhausts the capac-
ity of philosophy to tell you what there just has to be. There is no
further discipline called ‘ontology’ which can tell you what singular
terms we need to have in the language—whether or not we need
‘God’ for example.13
In this way, cultural politics usurps primacy over ontology. To really
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
discuss the existence of God or the reality of a world in a way that doesn’t
simply boil down to cultural politics, we would have to transcend God and
the world to see them from a neutral vantage point, which is impossible.
So, says Rorty, “We should stop trying to put our discursive practices
within a larger context, one which forms the background of all possible
social practices and which contains a list of ‘neutral’ canonical designa-
tors that delimit the range of the existent once and for all.”14
In light of this overview, we generally understand what Rorty means
by saying that cultural politics ought to (and in fact does) replace ontol-
ogy. In essence, he is denying the possibility of any type of transcendence,
since cultural politics is “the only game in town.”15 It is worth stopping
here to appreciate the powerful explanatory power of what Rorty pro-
poses. The more we look at his arguments, the more we see that any phe-
nomenon or argument for a phenomenon can be explained in terms of
cultural politics. Rorty’s position appears practically unassailable.
However, there remains the nagging question whether cultural politics is
itself merely one more contextualization among many. So we turn to our
initial goal of evaluating how Rorty’s endorsement of James’s claims
about happiness and a better world affects his central claim of cultural
politics replacing ontology and overcoming transcendence.
In the final pages of “Cultural Politics and the Question of the
Existence of God,” Rorty reintroduces his introductory Jamesian com-
ments in the form of a question: Even though belief in God is not nec-
essary, do individuals and groups have the right to religious devotion,
even if that devotion is completely irrational and unnecessary? He
answers tentatively “yes,” with the reservation that such religious devo-
tionmust be expressed both collectively and individually in ways that do
not inflict social harm. Whether expressed devotion constitutes harm has
been controversial from Jefferson’s Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom
to modern-day laïcité in France. “But,” Rorty adds, “I would urge that
debate over such concrete political questions is more useful for human
happiness than debate over the existence of God.”16 In this comment,
which contrasts “concrete political questions” against the senseless debate
7 Rorty, Cultural Politics9.
8 Rorty, Cultural Politics10.
ROBSCHWARTZ
over God’s existence, we see again the undesirability of appealing to what
is beyond. What is more, Rorty suggests that more happiness results from
actions and beliefs that display a “lack of ambition for transcendence”17
than from actions that grope for what is beyond. This position mirrors
Rorty’s introductory remark that, “[William] James agreed with John
Stuart Mill that the right thing to do, and a fortiori the right belief to
acquire, is alwaysthe one that will do most for human happiness.… James
often comes close to saying that all questions…boil down to questions
about what will best assist our attempts to create a better world.”18
We remember Rorty echoing James in asserting that “truth and real-
ity exist for the sake of social practices, rather than vice versa.”19But if we
take Rorty’s endorsement of James seriously, truth and reality don’t exist
merely for the sake of social practice. Although social practices underlie
truth and reality, James says that we ought to adopt those social practices
that are designed to result in happiness and a better world. So while beliefs
and social practice are not subject to theistic belief, Rorty’s remarks imply
that all beliefs are subjugated to social practice as dictated by happiness or
a better world. If we accept that our social practices are structured by some-
thing beyond themselves, then we might very well be dealing with a mani-
festation of the “background of all possible practices” that Rorty wished to
escape. In this way, happiness and the search for a better life might replace
cultural politics, and we are left to wonder if ontology went away at all.
We do not aim to say that Rorty is wrong in his views about hap-
piness. Thinkers since Aristotle and even before have pointed to hap-
piness as the structuring end of social practice,20and it would be a shame
to lose this way of talking about the world of our actions. However, this
way of talking doesn’t make sense when faced with the inconsistency that
results from Rorty’s claims about happiness in relation to the ontological
primacy of the social. In the realm of cultural politics, happiness is noth-
ing more than something ultimately beyond the grasp of society’s ability to
explain and collectively ratify. Although it appears that Rorty grounds our
9 Rorty, Cultural Politics11.
10 Rorty, Cultural Politics13.
11 Rorty, Cultural Politics13.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
action in happiness, cultural politics is impotent to validate such a move.
This impotence raises the question of the need for transcendence. It seems
that far from helping him to overcome transcendence and replace ontol-
ogy, Rorty’s reliance on any notion of happiness raises the question of
transcendence all the more.
Rorty's reliance on Jamesian happiness raises the question of tran-
scendence in the following way. For instance, when Emmanuel Lévinas
talks about transcendence, he speaks of the relationship to the Other. The
Other is transcendent because although it lies beyond our ability to fully
grasp and comprehend, it is intelligible and it makes intelligibility possi-
ble. It is transcendent because it is not reducible to the ego for which it
opens a horizon of intelligibility. In a similar way, when Rorty says that our
actions and practices are structured by happiness, he seems to imply that
there is something called ‘happiness’ that is independent from, irreducible
to, mere social practice. If it is, in fact, reducible, then he is ultimately
making the banal assertion that social practice structures social practice,
and we are left to wonder why he need speak of happiness at all. To use
happiness in the way he wishes, Rorty seems to require some notion of
transcendence.
Rorty implicitly claims to the contrary that the ontological primacy
of the social, which he grounds in Brandom’s reading of Heidegger’s cate-
gories in Being and Time, supports a “lack of ambition for transcen-
dence.”21 Neither Rorty nor Brandom denies the fact that Heidegger’s
writings (especially his later writings) retain the transcendent, ambitious
aim of uncovering ultimate phenomenological truth.22 However, they
both view Being and Timeas a work which lends itself ideally to a pragma-
tist, anthropological reading. So on the one hand we see that Rorty’s use
of happiness raises the question of transcendence while on the other
hand his use of Heidegger’s categories results in a lack of ambition for
transcendence.
In light of this discrepancy, we now further focus our aim on discov-
ering whether Being and Timeis, as Brandom and Rorty maintain, properly
12 Rorty, Cultural Politics23.
13 Rorty, Cultural Politics28.
14 Rorty, Cultural Politics 40.
15 Rorty, Cultural Politics11.
ROBSCHWARTZ
read as a purely pragmatic work which Heidegger discarded for that very
reason, or whether we ought to understand Being and Timeas a work that
can only be understood in the broader context of Heidegger’s later work
that dealt often and explicitly with transcendence.
II. How Should We Understand Heidegger’s Categories?
In his article “Heidegger’s Categories in Being and Time,” Robert
Brandom explains that Heidegger considered Being and Time to be
“merely” pragmatic and anthropological.23 Ultimately, Brandom’s article
centers around showing that Being and Time’s anthropological nature is a
direct result of the way that Heidegger lays out its fundamental categories:
(A) Zuhandensein, (B) Vorhandensein, and (C) Dasein.24
A. ZUHANDENSEIN
Brandom offers the following preliminary definition of
Zuhandensein: “Zuhandene things are those which a neo-Kantian would
describe as being imbued with human values and significances.”25 In fur-
ther introductory explanation of the ways that things carry meaning and
value, Brandom clarifies that to inhabit the world in a Heideggerian sense
is to take or experience each object as something. Three features of taking-
ascome to light in Brandom’s account:
1. “First, takings are public performances which accord with social
practices.”26
2. “Second, such performances are individuated as and by responses.”27
3. “Third, the responsive dispositions which constitute the social
practices are related to one another so as to satisfy a strong system-
aticity condition.”28
16 Rorty, Cultural Politics43.
17 Rorty, Cultural Politics19.
18 Rorty,Cultural Politics5, emphasis added.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
We notice from the outset that our taking objects as this or that is deter-
mined by social practice; moreover, our taking-as is a necessarily public
performance.
By public performance we mean something like the following. Let’s
suppose that a number of United Nations aid workers currently dwell in
the desert of Afghanistan with a nomadic Afghan tribe. No member of the
tribe can read any language. One day as the workers are teaching effective
hygiene, a B-52 flies overhead and out parachute hundreds of small food
and supply packets. The workers and their Afghan friends approach the
parachutes, and the Afghans stare down at the bright, never-before-seen
yellow packets. Being absolutely illiterate, they cannot read the packets’
intended purpose. The packets are obviously appropriate for some pur-
poses and inappropriate for others. However, to respond appropriately to
the packets requires not just that the Afghans take them as anything—
e.g., building material or fuel for their fires—but that they recognize spe-
cific possibilities as having special privilege over the rest. The aid
workers immediately take the foreign objects as food or medicine, and
in doing so “discover” the objects by placing them in reference or assign-
ment to other objects and events (e.g., yellow packet is placed in reference
to mealtime and berries).29In doing this, the workers’ taking-as is binding
not only themselves but on the Afghans as well, because it is public—in the
sense mentioned above—and binding on all those who witness their
proper response to the packets.
Brandom clarifies along these same lines that “Heidegger should be
interpreted in accord with the pragmatist thesis about authority, as taking
this privilege to consist in its social recognition, that is, as a matter of how
some community does or would respond to things.”30The workers in the
above example are the privileged authority because they can relate how
some community “does or would respond” appropriately to the packets
(from a Western point of view). Brandom’s previously mentioned system-
aticity condition comes into play when community responses toward
things are all appropriately unified in accordance with Dasein’s “referen-
19 Rorty, Cultural Politics9.
20 For more about Aristotle’s view on actions for the sake of happiness, see Aristotle,
Nichomachean Ethics 1097a15–19, 24–34. For commentary on Aristotle’s view, see Robinson
ROBSCHWARTZ
tial totality of significance” (which we will explicate shortly).31 We quickly
recapitulate here that Heidegger defines Zuhandensein in terms of taking-
as, which is further determined by social norms and practices.
B. VORHANDENSEIN
“Vorhandene things” defines Brandom, “are roughly the objective,
person-independent, causally interacting subjects of natural scientific
inquiry.”32 In relation to Zuhandensein, we can define Vorhandensein as
Zuhandenethings that are responded to by a specific performance; what is
more, Vorhandenethings can onlybe appropriately responded to by the per-
formance of assertion.33
Heidegger says that assertions are objects whose appropriate mode
of disclosure or use is inference. When we assert things, we share our tak-
ing-as with others and our assertion then becomes a thing that is
Zuhandene; in asserting we implicitly authorize reassertion. Furthermore,
because words come grouped in inferential families (e.g., red→color),
predication extends the authorizing dimension of asserting by allowing
not only reassertion, but the ability to draw inferences that go beyond
what was initially predicated (the car is red→the car has color). Brandom
helpfully pulls Zuhandene and Vorhandene things together by explaining
that:
The crucial point to understand here is that the move from [Zuhandene]
equipment, fraught with socially instituted significances, to objective
[Vorhandene] things, is not one of decontextualization, but of recon-
textualization…Treating something as [Vorhandene] is not ignoring its
social significance, but attending to a special sort of significance it
can have, namely significance for the correctness of assertions about
it…[Vorhandensein] may thus be defined as what is [Zuhandene]…for
the practice of assertion, that is, as what is responded to as such only
by making a claim about it.34
99–100.
21 Rorty, Cultural Politics19.
22 See Knobe; see also Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories389.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
C. DASEIN
We previously found that Zuhandensein is brought together by
Dasein’s “referential totality of significance.” By extension,
Vorhandensein—because it is ultimately reducible to Zuhandensein—also
makes sense only within Dasein’s referential totality. The explication of
this referential totality subsumes all of Heidegger’s efforts in Being and
Time, but Brandom concentrates on what he considers to be the three
most important points of Heidegger’s explication. The first point that
Brandom underscores is that Dasein’s nature is primarily social. He
quotes Heidegger as saying that “so far as Dasein is at all, it has Being-
with-one-another as its kind of Being.”35 The second point that
Brandom highlights is that Dasein’s sociality is indispensable to the
practical activities that are constitutive of its referential totality of sig-
nificance—in other words, Being-with-others is prerequisite to
Zuhandensein. Brandom lastly brings out Heidegger’s point that we can
only understand Dasein’s individuality within the context of its social-
ity.”36
Not only is the distinction between the ontological categories of
[Zuhandensein] and [Vorhandensein] intelligible only in terms of the
sort of being that Dasein has, but the difference between Dasein’s
sort of being and [Zuhandensein] and [Vorhandensein] must itself be
understood in terms of Dasein.37
Looking at how Brandom broadly defines Zuhandensein as “imbued
with human values and significances,” Vorhandensein as the
“objective,…causally interacting subjects of natural scientific inquiry,”38
and Daseinas a social entity in terms of which all three are regulated and
defined, we clearly see where Rorty derived his three categories of the
ontological primacy of the social. Although Rorty radicalizes all three posi-
tions, stripping them of their original nuances, the categories that
Brandom identifies in Being and Timeand the categories that Rorty uses to
23 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories387. Rorty extrapolates the threefold ontological primacy of the
social from this article by Brandom.
24 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories387.
25 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories387.
ROBSCHWARTZ
dissolve ontology are directly correlated. Brandom elsewhere binds Dasein
and Zuhandensein even closer together, saying that they are “internally
related,”39 and that they “mutually presuppose one another as substruc-
tures of being-in-the-world.”40
This portrait of Dasein’s relation to Zuhandensein is quite accurate.
However, in emphasizing Dasein’s social aspects, Brandom brings the
anthropological aspect of Heidegger’s early work to the fore, dissociating it
from his later work which dealt more with the general problems of tran-
scendence involved in overcoming metaphysics. By interpreting Heidegger
in this way, philosophers like Rorty and Brandom open up a space in
which everything can be explained purely in terms of the relation between
Daseinand Zuhandensein. Everything boils down to the relation, and we are
left with an ontological primacy of the social that leaves more questions
than it answers.
III. Thomas Sheehan: Kehreand Ereignis
Just as Rorty gives Brandom’s writings as the “best weapons” for
defending his pragmatic views, Thomas Sheehan’s article “Kehre and
Ereignis: A Prolegomenon to An Introduction to Metaphysics,” provides
ample defense of the view that Being and Time not only can but must be
seen as an integral part of Heidegger’s project taken as a whole. Sheehan
begins his article by explaining that readers of Heidegger often do not dif-
ferentiate between “the turn” (die Kehre) and “the change in Heidegger’s
thinking” (die Wendung im Denken).41The former, clarifies Sheehan, is sim-
ply one of the many names that Heidegger uses to express the pervading
topic of his work. More specifically, this turn is the way that Ereignis
(appropriation) works, which will be discussed in more depth momen-
tarily. The latter distinction, the change in Heidegger’s thinking, has refer-
ence to the way that Heidegger shifted the way that he spoke about the
turn.
Sheehan emphasizes that misunderstanding in regard to either of
these matters—to think, for instance, that the turn was a shift from an
26 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories391.
27 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories391.
28 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories391.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
anthropological emphasis to a more broadly ontological one—“can be
disastrous for understanding Heidegger…[The turn] is emphatically not
an alteration in Heidegger’s thinking, not an episode that could be
dated to a period in his philosophical career.”42The turn is the focus of
Heidegger’s career from beginning to end. The “change in thinking”
simply means that Heidegger’s attempts to express the turn differed
from the “transcendental–horizonal” approach of Being and Timeto the
approach that characterized the rest of his career and that he most often
expressed as Ereignis.43To see why a “merely anthropological” reading of
Being and Time does not take account of the turn that characterized the
whole of Heidegger’s thinking, we will use Sheehan to identify the turn
and locate the abiding aspect of Heidegger’s writings.
In his account of Being and Time, Brandom highlights what
Sheehan calls “one of Heidegger’s major achievements.”44 This water-
shed achievement results from Heidegger’s success in moving the mean-
ing of entity from the traditional “being-out-there,” to the
phenomenologically transformed “appearing-as.”45 This development
leads to our understanding of Dasein in what Brandom calls its “refer-
ential totality of significance.”46 Sheehan affirms with Brandom that,
“This change is visible in Heidegger’s reinterpretation of Sein (an
entity’s being) as Anwesen (an entity’s givenness to possible human
engagement), in keeping with the principle ‘Being as the givenness of enti-
ties concerns Dasein.’”47 This reinterpretation of Dasein as givenness to
human engagement is prerequisite to Heidegger and Brandom’s talk of
Dasein’s “Being-with-others.” The engagement of Dasein with entities in
the world also allows the “taking-as” that Brandom rightly locates as the
key to understanding Zuhandensein. “Nonetheless,” stresses Sheehan,
“being as the givenness and availability of entities was not Heidegger’s fun-
damental topic.”48
The givenness and availability of entities, Being-with-others, and tak-
ing-as do not constitute the turn always operative in Heidegger’s thought
29 See Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories392.
30 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories391.
31 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories395.
32 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories 387.
ROBSCHWARTZ
because all of these issues lie within the explanatory power of metaphysics,
which Heidegger desired to overcome. A close reading of Being and Time
reveals Heidegger’s desire to surpass the explanatory power of metaphysics
and the metaphysical worldview. Heidegger suggests in a number of places
in Being and Time that metaphysics obscures the inner turn of Ereignis,
which he then expressed as the “question of the meaning of Being.”49But
how did Heidegger intend to surpass metaphysics, and what was he trying
to say by talking about the question of the meaning of being?
Sheehan reveals that the question that Heidegger used to propel
himself past metaphysics into the realm of transcendence was: “What
brings about Being as the givenness or availability of entities?”50 In other
words, Heidegger did not simply desire to answer the questions, “What is
givenness?” and “What are the effects of understanding ‘being’ as
‘Anwesen’?” (which is the level at which Brandom leaves Heidegger’s inter-
est as expressed in Being and Time). Instead, Heidegger wanted to probe the
fundamental questions of, “What produces givenness?” and “What
enables being as Anwesento be given at all?”51In the answer to these ques-
tions, suggests Sheehan, we find the “star” that guided Heidegger’s
thought in Being and Timeand all of his works. Initially Heidegger answers
these question by saying that there is a “tertium quid over and above both
being as an entity’s givenness and the dative of that givenness.”52 In the
end, Heidegger comes to equate this tertium quid, or “enabling power,”
with Dasein, Lichtung, openness, Ereignis, and many other terms that we
associate with the later Heidegger’s attempts to think about transcendence
in terms of the power that enables givenness.
Full explication of Heidegger’s resolution to the questions that he
poses in overcoming metaphysics belongs to a future analysis. I wish here
to simply underscore that understanding Heidegger’s project in Being and
Timerequires us to recognize his desire to overcome metaphysics, which he
eventually accomplishes by revealing Ereignis as an enabling power that
stands both over and above an entity’s givenness to possible human
33 See Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories399–401.
34 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories403–04.
35 Heidegger, Being and Time125. Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories397. All references to Being and
Timeare given using the original pagination from Sein und Zeit.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
engagement. A power that stands prerequisite to any entity’s givenness to
possible human engagement accords perfectly with Heidegger’s desire to
uncover the ground of ultimate phenomenological truth, or, as Rorty
would say, the background of all possible practices.
IV. Conclusion
We set out to evaluate how Rorty’s reliance on William James and
Robert Brandom would ultimately affect his central claim that cultural
politics replaces ontology and makes any talk of transcendence futile. In
relying on James, Rorty ran into the problem that explaining our actions
in terms of happiness and a better world does not square with the require-
ments laid out in the ontological primacy of the social. The ontological
primacy of the social, as we recall, is Rorty’s appropriation of Brandom’s
reading of Being and Time, which they both interpret in a pragmatist way.
Rorty and Brandom wish to omit from their reading of Being and Timethe
aspect that lies at its core; namely, a deep and abiding desire for transcen-
dence that Heidegger expresses as the “question of the meaning of
Being.”53 Although Rorty and Brandom formulate systems from
Heidegger’s categories in Being and Timethat allow their adherents to fos-
ter a lack of ambition for transcendence, such a lack of ambition runs con-
trary to the spirit in which Heidegger wrote all his works, including his
earliest.
So Rorty’s arguments against transcendence fall apart in two cru-
cial ways. First, he cannot omit a background of all possible social prac-
tices and still say, as James says, that all our actions ought to be for the
sake of happiness or a better world. Following James seems to imply that
happiness acts as some kind of background that ought to give structure to
all action and belief. Second, as Rorty depends on Brandom’s interpre-
tation of Heidegger in formulating the ontological primacy of the
social, he falls victim to the same problems that Brandom does.
Although Brandom’s explication of Being and Time is lucid at a local
level, the way that he situates his interpretation in the wider array of
36 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories 397.
ROBSCHWARTZ
37 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories389.
38 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories 387.
39 Brandom, Dasein3.
40 Brandom, Dasein5.
41 Sheehan 3.
42 Sheehan 3.
43 See Sheehan 4.
44 Sheehan 6.
45 Sheehan 6.
46 Brandom, Heidegger’s Categories395.
47 Sheehan 6.
48 Sheehan 7.
49 Heidegger,Being and Time 21. See also 56, 59, 248, 293, 401.
50 Sheehan 7.
51 Sheehan 7.
52 Sheehan 7.
53 Heidegger, Being and Time2.
ROBSCHWARTZ
Heidegger’s work is myopic. Thomas Sheehan shows us that any reading
of Heidegger’s work must take account of not only the Anwesen that
makes possible the three categories that Brandom identifies, but also of
the Ereignis that makes the Anwesen possible. Inasmuch as Rorty’s argu-
ments rely on Brandom’s interpretation of Heidegger, we would be wise
to conclude that there is a tertuim quid that underlies his primacy of the
social.
TRANSCENDENCEOVERCULTURALPOLITICS
References
Brandom, Robert B. “Dasien, the Being that Thematizes.” Epoché 5 (1997):
1–38.
———. “Heidegger’s Categories in Being and Time.” The Monist 66, no. 3
(1983): 387–409.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time.Trans. John Macquarrie and Edward
Robinson. New York: Harper and Row, 1962.
———. Poetry, Language, Thought. Trans. Albert Hofstadter. New York:
Harper and Row, 1975.
Knobe, Joshua. “A Talent for Bricolage: An Interview with Richard
R o r t y . ”
<http://www.princeton.edu/~jknobe/rorty.html>.
Originally published in The Dualist2 (1995): 56–71.
Robinson, Daniel N. Aristotle’s Psychology. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1989.
Rorty, Richard. “Cultural Politics and the Question of the Existence of
God” (ms. 10 July 2001).
———. “Foreword.” Heidegger, Authenticity, and Modernity: Essays in Honor of
Hubert L. Dreyfus, vol. 1. ix–xiii. Ed. Mark A. Wrathall and Jeff
Malpas. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000.
Sheehan, Thomas. “Kehreand Ereignis: A Prolegomenon to An Introduction
to Metaphysics.” A Companion to Heidegger’s Introduction to
Metaphysics, 3–16. Ed. Richard Polt and Gregory Fried. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2001.