Ergo
an open access
journal of philosophy
S R
cience and ationality
o a
foR ne and ll
P.D. Magnus
a successful scientific community might require different scientists to form different
beliefs even when faced with the same evidence. The standard line is that this would
create a conflict between the demands of collective rationality which scientists face as
members of the community and the demands of individual rationality which they face
as epistemic agents. This is expressed both by philosophers of science (working on the
distribution of cognitive labor) and by epistemologists (working on the epistemology
of disagreement). The standard line fails to take into account the relation between ra-
tional belief and various epistemic risks, values of which are a matter of personal and
social commitment. This introduces the possibility of conflicts the standard line does
not recognize, because someone with extreme values might be individually rational but
too far beyond the pale to have a place in the scientific community. More importantly,
it introduces at least a possibility for good scientists to be rational individuals.
s
cience would probably go best if individual scientists at least sometimes form
differing beliefs even when faced with the same evidence. The standard line, both
among philosophers of science and epistemologists, is that this creates a conflict be-
tween the demands of collective rationality which scientists face as members of the
community and the demands of individual rationality which they face as epistemic
agents. I argue that this conflict presumes an inadequate conception of individual ra-
tionality. When we take into account the relation between rational belief and the val-
ues of various risks, it is at least possible for good scientists to be rational individuals.
1. The Standard Line in Philosophy of Science
It seems obvious that a community of one thousand scientists working together
to make discoveries and solve puzzles should arrange itself differently than would
Contact: P.D. Magnus <pmagnus@fecundity.com>
http://dx.doi.org/10.3998/ergo.12405314.0001.005 129
130 • P.D. Magnus
one thousand scientist- hermits working independently. Because of limited time,
resources, and attention, an independent scientist can explore only some of the
possible approaches to a problem. Working alone, each hermit would explore the
most promising approaches. They would needlessly duplicate the work of others
and would be unlikely to develop approaches which look unpromising but really
have tremendous potential. Contrariwise, a large community can more rigorously
explore the space of possible approaches. Most scientists should work on the most
promising approaches, but a smaller number can be committed to approaches that
initially look less promising. Exploratory work can reveal if one of those initially
unpromising approaches has unrealized potential, and more scientists can adopt it
once its potential becomes more apparent.
This division of cognitive labor is an important feature of science. It is a cen-
tral theme in the work of Thomas Kuhn, who emphasized both the importance of
a shared approach and the need for some scientists to look beyond it. This is his
famous distinction between normal science (governed by a paradigm) and revolu-
tionary science (in which one paradigm is replaced by another). Kuhn (1977) calls
this need to abide by shared commitments and also to innovate “the essential ten-
sion” in science. Importantly, he recognizes that this tension is not felt internally
by every scientist. Instead, some explore wilder alternative approaches while most
hew more closely to the dominant paradigm. He writes,
Most anomalies are resolved by normal means; most proposals for new
theories do prove to be wrong. If all members of a community responded
to each anomaly as a source of crisis or embraced each new theory ad-
vanced by a colleague, science would cease. If, on the other hand, no one
reacted to anomalies or to brand- new theories in high- risk ways, there
would be few or no revolutions. (2012: 185–6 )
What makes a novel approach appealing to a particular scientist cannot be its ob-
jective promise, because otherwise pursuing it would not seem to be a risk. Rather,
a scientist might initially adopt an approach for personal or aesthetic reasons, and
their work on it can reveal its potential. Kuhn writes, “If they had not quickly
taken it up for highly individual reasons, the new candidate for paradigm might
never have been sufficiently developed to attract the allegiance of the scientific
community as a whole” (2012: 155).
Philip Kitcher develops this idea in a formal way, acknowledging “a large debt
to the ideas and writings of Thomas Kuhn” (1990: 5). subsequent philosophers
have both extended Kitcher’s formal model and developed others.1 I am not con-
cerned here with the technical details, but instead with the fact that many authors
1. see recent surveys by Ryan Muldoon (2013) and Michael Weisberg (2010).
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
Science and Rationality for One and All • 131
in this tradition take it to involve an opposition between the epistemic demands
of individual rationality which weigh on a scientist and the epistemic demands of
collective rationality that weigh on the scientific community. For example, Kitch-
er claims that this work poses “a mismatch between the demands of individual
rationality and those of collective (or community) rationality” (1990: 6). Kevin
Zollman writes, “Looking at . . . scientists from the perspective of individualistic
epistemology, one might be inclined to criticize the scientists’ behavior. However,
when viewed as a community, their behavior becomes optimal” (2010: 33).
One may wonder whether these philosophers of science really think that sci-
ence puts the demands of responsible science in tension with the demands of in-
dividual rationality. Beyond brief passages like the ones that I have quoted, they
do not whinge at length about it. This is not because they resolve the problem,
however, but because they give up thinking about scientists as rational agents with
full information.
Kitcher’s solution is to “dissolve the notion of rationality” (1993: 194, empha-
sis in original). On his view, we should not expect or enquire after whether scien-
tists are rational. Instead, we should ask only whether they employ strategies of
belief formation which promote cognitive goals, recognizing that there are limits
and conflicts involved in their doing so. In cases of science having functioned well,
Kitcher writes, “society, nature, and sound individual reasoning combined to drive
the social learning machine to a new success” (1993: 218). He demands sound rea-
soning not in the technical sense (valid with true premises) but just in the minimal
sense of employing reliable-e nough strategies to promote collective progress. This
allows for scientists to use different strategies, to take different risks, and to draw
different conclusions even from the same evidence.
Zollman skirts the problem in a different way. Instead of arguing that scien-
tists might responsibly draw different conclusions in the face of the same evidence,
he models scientists as having limited information. In his models, the community
structure of science limits which scientists share their findings with which others.
Individuals react to different evidence and so may disagree, even though rational-
ity would not allow disagreement in the face of the same evidence.
2. The Standard Line in Epistemology
suppose we accept a roughly Kuhnian account of the distribution of cognitive
labor. given the same evidence, some scientists pursue research which has P as a
presupposition. a few scientists pursue research which has incompatible presup-
positions; to simplify the case, just suppose that the rival approach has P as a
presupposition. One might advise them all to believe neither P nor P, to remain
∼
agnostic while guiding their research by one presupposition or the other. There are
∼
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
132 • P.D. Magnus
reasons to think this would be bad advice. First, scientists who cultivate agnosti-
cism might not pursue their chosen research program with the necessary vigor. The
community would then do better if those individuals fully embraced the presuppo-
sitions of their approach. second, there is some reason to think that any declared
agnosticism would just be ersatz. a scientist whose research presumes P might
never have occasion to act on anything but that presupposition. Their lab is outfit-
ted to pursue the P-p resuming approach and they have filled it with P- presuming
postdocs, after all, and one of the advantages of dividing cognitive labor is pre-
cisely that a scientist committed to that approach no longer needs to worry about
the possibility of P. arguably, this kind of practical commitment to P— acting as
if P at every turn—is tantamount to belief that P.
∼
although these reasons might be contested, I will accept without further argu-
ment that the collective rationality of the community requires each individual sci-
entist in this situation either to believe P or to believe P. If the scientists are indi-
vidually rational, then rationality must allow agents in comparable circumstances
∼
to come to different beliefs; that is, epistemology must be permissive.
Many contemporary epistemologists deny this kind of permissiveness. For ex-
ample, Roger White (2005) argues against any epistemological account which al-
lows for agents in possession of the same evidence to reach different conclusions.
anthony Brueckner and alex Bundy rebut White’s arguments but nevertheless ac-
cept what they call “the plausible ‘Pyrrhonian’ principle whereby one always ought
to withhold judgment when one’s evidence equally favors a belief of P and a belief
of P . . .” They add, “While Pyrrhonian skepticism may not be attractive, this
principle certainly is” (2012: 166).2 The principle condemns at least some scientists
∼
as irrational if, in the face of the same evidence, some come to believe P and others
to believe P.
similar positions are common in the literature on the epistemology of disagree-
∼
ment, where an epistemic peers’ belief that P is taken to undercut one’s belief in
P. according to the equal weight view, advocated by adam Elga (2007) and others,
∼
the peer’s belief that P weighs against P just as much as one’s own reasons for P
weigh in favor of it.3 David Christensen notes the tension between these responses
∼
to disagreement and the group-l evel strategies like the ones I discussed in the previ-
ous section. He writes,
It’s quite plausible that knowledge is best advanced by people exploring,
and attempting to defend, a variety of answers to a given question. Perhaps,
human psychology makes this easier to do when investigators actually have
2. The Pyrrhonian skeptic appeals to the possibility of acting for all the world as if P while not
believing P, a possibility which I set aside here.
3. Ruth Weintraub (2013) surveys and rebuts arguments against the possibility of rational dis-
agreement among epistemic peers.
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
Science and Rationality for One and All • 133
a lot of confidence in the hypotheses they’re trying to defend. Certain sorts
of inquiry might well work best when a variety of investigators have irra-
tionally high levels of confidence in a variety of pet hypotheses. . . . . But I
would argue that the patterns of belief are no more epistemically rational
for all that. (2007: 215)
so Christensen insists that, from the standpoint of epistemology, scientists partici-
pating in the collective system would be irrational.
3. Putting It Together
The previous sections have pointed to an apparent tension between the demands
of individual rationality and the demands of the scientific community. although
this tension is recognized both by philosophers of science and by epistemologists,
I want to argue that both sides are mistaken. scientists can responsibly participate
in scientific communities.
The problem is that both sides presume that individual, epistemic rationality is
just aimed at one univocal thing. The alternative is what I have elsewhere called the
James- Rudner- Douglas or JRD thesis: “anytime a scientist announces a judgement
of fact, they are making a tradeoff between the risk of different kinds of error. This
balancing act depends on the costs of each kind of error, so scientific judgement
involves assessments of the value of different outcomes” (Magnus 2013).
The label is taken from the name of three exponents of it across the last cen-
tury or so: William James, Richard Rudner, and Heather Douglas. James famously
argues that we are subject to inconsistent epistemic demands. He writes, “Believe
truth! shun error!—these, we see, are two materially different laws; and by choos-
ing between them we may end up coloring differently our whole intellectual life”
(1948: 100). James argues that this opens up a space for belief in the absence of
sufficient evidence. If my personal beliefs overextend in this way, I accept a greater
risk of error but gain the chance of believing a truth which I otherwise would not
have gotten to believe. He is primarily thinking of personal and religious matters,
and argues simply that we should “respect one another’s mental freedom” (1948:
109).4 Rudner (1953) makes a parallel argument for scientific claims, but hopes
that the appropriate value judgments might be provided by an objective science
of ethics. Douglas (2009) reiterates Rudner’s argument but without the dream of
objective values. she recognizes that belief choice necessarily involves a balance
between the risk of believing something false and the risk of failing to believe
4. Weintraub (2013) invokes James to argue for the possibility of rational disagreement. Her
primary focus is philosophical disputes, so she (like James) does not extend the result to scientific
disagreement.
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
134 • P.D. Magnus
something true—a balance which can only be struck by personal or social com-
mitments. she writes, “Within the parameters of available resources and methods,
some choices must be made, and that choice should weigh the costs of false posi-
tives versus false negatives. Weighing these costs legitimately involves social, ethi-
cal, and cognitive values” (2009: 104).
If the evidence favors P, then one might still suppose that the only rational
options are to believe P or to believe nothing. For example, Richard Foley (1993)
invokes James in arguing for the possibility of rational disagreement but argues
that personal commitment only sets a threshold of rational confidence that will
suffice for belief. On this view, the JRD thesis just allows for some individuals to
rationally believe while others are rationally agnostic. This fails to recognize the
full force of the thesis. Commitments do more than define a single threshold to bal-
ance the value one might gain by believing truth against the cost one might pay for
believing in error. Rather, different possible truths may offer different value, and
different possible falsities may impose different costs. This allows for some people
to rationally believe P and others to rationally believe P.
Imagine a community of scientists who are arranged so as to have the best col-
∼
lective distribution of their labor. In this community, the work of some scientists
presupposes P, and the work of others presupposes Q which is incompatible with
P. Moreover, presume that things will go best for science if the former scientists
believe P (and Q) while the latter believe Q (and P). With the JRD thesis in
mind, it becomes clear that agnosticism could make their personal epistemic situ-
∼ ∼
ation worse too.
Consider a particular scientist—call her Jane—who believes P and structures
her work around the assumption. The scientific evidence is suggestive but not en-
tirely decisive, and a more cautious scientist might be agnostic in precisely the
same circumstances. Jane values believing a truth about the matter more highly
than avoiding a false belief. More specifically, she values the possibility of believing
P if it is true more than she is averse to having a false belief if P is false. another
scientist—call her sarah—structures her work around the alternative approach.
she values the possibility of believing Q if it is true more highly than the cost of
falsely believing Q if it is false. since Q is incompatible with P, sarah misses out on
the opportunity to believe P and is willing to accept the risk involved in believing
P. It is rational for Jane to believe P and for sarah to believe P.5 The demands
that individual and collective rationality place on them coincide.
∼ ∼
One might think that Jane and sarah are illicitly cutting corners. If a scientist
5. a standard claim in the epistemology of disagreement is that finding rational, well- informed
peers who have opposing beliefs should cause Jane to doubt her own belief. That could be made
compatible with my claim here by denying that Jane and sarah are epistemic peers because they as-
sign different values to the risks and benefits involved, although ‘epistemic peer’ is not usually defined
in this way.
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
Science and Rationality for One and All • 135
has any business believing P or Q, then evidence and overwhelming reasons will
eventually be uncovered. Yet no evidence is ever absolutely overwhelming, and
evidence which would generally be taken as convincing might not be uncovered
until after they are dead.6 For each scientist, agnosticism would guard against the
danger of her having a false belief. However, it increases the chance that she will
never end up believing the truth. The JRD thesis means that both are legitimate
epistemic considerations for her.
note that the JRD thesis only provides what Douglas calls an indirect role for
values, one which turns on “the sufficiency of evidence, the weighing of uncertain-
ty, and the consequences of error” (2009: 103). The values that enter into Jane’s
believing P are the benefit of believing P if P is true, the cost of not believing P if P
is true, the benefit of not believing P if P is false, and the cost of believing P if P is
false. These are precisely the benefits of accuracy and the cost of error. There is no
place for how much she would value unconditionally believing P (regardless of its
truth) or how much she would value P being the case. Deciding belief based on the
latter values would just be wishful thinking.7
One might still worry that the JRD thesis opens the door to madness. since
there is nothing in this argument which depends on the content of P, a hypotheti-
cal Jane can be posed for any belief whatsoever. someone with a crazy array of
value commitments can rationally come to have crazy beliefs. However, a parallel
possibility arises for any theory of rationality, because someone who believes crazy
premises can rationally derive crazy conclusions from them. The informal solution,
the path for avoiding madness, is to eschew crazy beliefs and crazy value commit-
ments. There is no formal test for craziness, of course, but this is true as much for
beliefs as for commitments.
Moreover, there are some qualitative constraints which arise especially for the
scientific case. as Kuhn points out, some commitments would be tantamount to
giving up science altogether (Kuhn 2012: e.g. 79). so the socially- defined bounds
of science can give us some implicit guidance in distinguishing legitimate disagree-
ment from craziness. although I do not claim this to be exhaustive, let’s briefly
consider two kinds of constraint.
First, few scientific examples pose choices between P and P. Instead they pose
a choice between incompatible but non-e xhaustive options like P and Q. There are
∼
indefinitely many other possibilities which have no scientific plausibility whatsoever.
any commitments which were sufficient to lead to Jane’s believing unscientific R
would be sufficient to make her not a scientist anymore. It may be that sometimes
6. They can even have good reason to think that they will not live to see the evidence, if they are
old and part of a long- term research program.
7. some authors argue for a broader or direct role for commitments in deciding belief. For ex-
ample, Biddle (2013) suggests that arguments from underdetermination, if they make any place for
values in scientific inference, would ultimately make a place for any contextual factors whatsoever.
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
136 • P.D. Magnus
the range of possible commitments a scientist might have and still be a scientist is
narrow enough to rule out any freedom to believe. For Kuhn, the possibility of hew-
ing to something besides the dominant paradigm only opens in time of crisis.
second, a scientist must be honest about the evidence. as the research guided
by P fails to progress and becomes weighed down by anomalies, there is no deter-
minate point at which reason demands that Jane give up either the research or her
belief in P. However, she ought not pretend there is progress when there is not or
deny that there are anomalies. Her commitments give her freedom to dispute the
significance of these things but not their existence. as Imre Lakatos insists, there is
scope within rationality both for “pigheadedness” and “modesty” in pursuing rival
research programs (1978: 113). He writes, “One may rationally stick to a degen-
erating research programme until it is overtaken by a rival and even after. What
one must not do is to deny its poor public record” (1978: 117). some value com-
mitments would make it difficult or impossible for Jane to even recognize salient
evidence, and those commitments would make her scientifically beyond the pale.
4. Taking It Apart
The previous section concluded with the idea that there are nonformal constraints
on what value commitments scientists can have qua scientists. The constraints are
fallible, defeasible, historical products, just like all the structure of science.
This makes for a possibility that seems not to have been noticed in the exist-
ing literature: at some point in the history of science, there could be premises or
commitments which are scientifically out of bounds but which would not count
as crazy by the standards of individual epistemology. so the commitments of some
individuals might allow them to be individually rational while making them un-
able to count as scientists—a fortiori making them unable to meet the demands of
collective rationality as part of the scientific community.
The standard line, discussed above, is that collective rationality might require
more disagreement than individual rationality can allow. The point here is the re-
verse: given particular constraints and commitments at a time, collective rational-
ity might allow less disagreement than individual rationality requires.
To make this concrete, consider the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (sETI).
Let P be the proposition that there is intelligent life on some other world which could
be detected by a systematic sETI project. Direct evidence for P is lacking. One indirect
argument relies on the Drake Equation, a formula which calculates the number of
detectable civilizations from the total number of stars which could support life, the
fraction of those which will have planets that could support life, the fraction of those
which actually have life on them, and so on. Every term in the equation is subject to
considerable uncertainty, making it reasonable to be agnostic about P. However, it is
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
Science and Rationality for One and All • 137
plausible to think that sETI would be pursued with greater vigor and ingenuity by
scientists who believe P. since alleged alien signals should not be accepted too readily,
it would be good to have some scientists who believe P and who would subject the
signals to critical, sceptical scrutiny. so the community might maximize its chances of
∼
identifying alien civilizations (if there are any) by having some members who already
think that there are (or probably are) such civilizations and others who already think
that there are (or probably are) none. If individual rationality required scientists to
be agnostic—or even if it just required them all to come to the same conclusion on
the basis of available evidence—then there would be a conflict between the epistemic
good of the scientific community and the individual rationality of scientists. The force
of the JRD thesis is that such a conflict can be avoided. Enthusiast scientists would be
rational if they saw more positive value in correctly believing P (if it is true) than they
saw negative value in wrongly believing P (if it is false). Cynical scientists would be
rational if their values were the reverse of that.8
Other cases of scientific controversy might have this same structure. For ex-
ample, reasonable scientists disagreed about heliocentrism in the time after Coper-
nicus but before Kepler. It is a historical question whether they did so because of
disagreement about values and costs and so were rational due to considerations I
have discussed here, or whether they disagreed for other reasons. One might worry
that, because heliocentrism is logically contingent, the JRD thesis entails that there
is a possible array of values such that if someone held them today then it would be
rational for that person to reject heliocentrism—but surely no responsible scientist
today could be a geocentrist! This just illustrates that some values would be crazily
extreme. a present- day geocentrist might obey the demands of individual rational-
ity but, because they could not be a responsible member of the astronomical com-
munity, would violate the demands of collective rationality.
since the requirements of individual and collective rationality are logically in-
dependent, there can be no a priori guarantee that their demands will harmonious-
ly align. Whether conflict or harmony is realized depends on the structure of the
community, the state of science, and the value commitments of would- be scientists.
What I hope to have shown, contra the standard line, is that conflict is not in-
evitable. The space opened by the JRD thesis makes it possible for scientists to obey
individual rationality while participating in collectively rational arrangements.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jason D’Cruz, gunnar Babcock, John Milanese, and Brad
armour- garb for helpful feedback on earlier versions of this paper.
8. since it would be bad for the whole community to obsess over sETI, perhaps it would be best
for the community if many scientists were agnostic. The agnostics would be rational if they saw no
significant cost in suspending judgement.
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •
138 • P.D. Magnus
References
Biddle, Justin (2013). state of the Field: Transient underdetermination and Values in sci-
ence. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 44(1), 124– 133. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2012.09.003
Brueckner, anthony and alex Bundy (2012) On “Epistemic Permissiveness”. Synthese,
188(2), 165–1 77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11229-011-9921-9
Christensen, David (2007). Epistemology of Disagreement: The good news. The Philo-
sophical Review, 116(2), 187–2 17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1215/00318108-2006-035
Douglas, Heather E. (2009). Science, Policy, and the Value-f ree Ideal. university of Pitts-
burgh Press.
Elga, adam (2007). Reflection and Disagreement. Noûs, 41(3), 478– 502.
Foley, Richard (1993). Working Without a Net: A Study of Egocentric Epistemology. Ox-
ford university Press.
James, William (1948). The Will to Believe. Essays in Pragmatism, 88– 109. alburey Castell
(Ed.). Hafner Publishing Co.
Kitcher, Philip (1990). The Division of Cognitive Labor. Philosophy of Science, 87(1), 5– 22.
Kitcher, Philip (1993). The Advancement of Science. Oxford university Press.
Kuhn, Thomas [s.] (1977). The Essential Tension: Tradition and Innovation in scientific
Research. The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change,
225– 239. university of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, Thomas [s.] (2012). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, fourth edition. univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, Imre (1978). History of science and its Rational Reconstructions. Falsifica-
tion and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes: Philosophical Pa-
pers, volume 1, 102– 138. Cambridge university Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511621123.004
Magnus, P.D. (2013). What scientists Know is not a Function of What scientists Know.
Philosophy of Science, 80(5), 840–8 49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/673718
Muldoon, Ryan (2013). Diversity and the Division of Cognitive Labor. Philosophy Com-
pass, 8(2), 117– 125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12000
Rudner, Richard (1953). The scientist qua scientist Makes Value Judgments. Philosophy of
Science, 20(1), 1– 6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/287231
Weintraub, Ruth (2013) Can steadfast Peer Disagreement Be Rational? The Philosophical
Quarterly, 63(253), 740–7 59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9213.12065
Weisberg, Michael (2010) new approaches to the Division of Cognitive Labor. New
Waves in Philosophy of Science, P.D. Magnus and Jacob Busch (Eds.), 250– 269. Pal-
grave MacMillan.
White, Roger (2005). Epistemic Permissiveness. Philosophical Perspectives, 19(1), 445–
459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1520-8583.2005.00069.x
Zollman, Kevin J. s. (2010). The Epistemic Benefit of Transient Diversity. Erkenntnis,
72(1), 17– 35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10670-009-9194-6
Ergo vol. 1, no. 5 2014
• •