Ergo
ANOPENACCESS
JOURNALOFPHILOSOPHY
emantic roblem
A S P
or tage heory
F S T
MATTHEW MCKEEVER
Isubjectthesemanticclaimsofstagetheorytoscrutinyandshowthatit’sunclearhow
tomakethemcomeouttrueforasimpleanddeepreason: thestagetheoristneeds
tensed elements to semantically modify the denotations of referring expressions to
enableustotalkaboutpastandfuturestages. Butinthesyntaxofnaturallanguage,
expressionscarryingtensemodifyverbsandadjectivesandnotreferringexpressions.
Thismismatchbetweenwhatthestagetheoristneeds,andwhatlanguageprovides,
makesithardtoseehowthestagetheorist’ssemanticclaimscouldbetrue.
1.Introduction
Stage theory is the metaphysical view that everyday objects like you and the
Eiffel tower are stages—instantaneous temporal parts. Existing defenses of stage
theory by Katherine Hawley (2001) and Ted Sider (1996; 2001) quite explicitly
include certain semantic claims. Thus Sider says that stages are
the referents of ordinary terms, members of ordinary domains of quan-
tification, subjects of ordinary predications, and so on. (2001: 60)
In the same vein, Hawley says,
The two accounts [perdurantism and stage theory] differ over what we
talk about when we use phrases like ‘the tennis ball’, and about which
objects satisfy sortal predicates like ‘is a tennis ball’ ... according to stage
theory, it is stages themselves which are tennis balls (or bananas, or hu-
man beings, as the case may be). (2001: 42)
Not only that, both agree, in broad outline, about the stage-theoretic truth
conditions of sentences. A sentence like
Contact: MatthewMcKeever<mipmckeever2@gmail.com>
https://doi.org/10.3998/ergo.12405314.0004.024 693
·
694 Matthew McKeever
(1) John was happy
will be true for the stage theorist provided there’s some stage which is suitably
related to the stage picked out, at the time of utterance, by ‘John’, such that it
is prior to the time of utterance, and it possesses the property of being happy
(Sider 2001: 193; Hawley 2001: 54–57). Sider and Hawley disagree slightly about
the nature of suitable relatedness; it is unimportant for this paper, but I will on
occasion use ‘I-relation’ to denote the relation.
My aim here is to examine the cogency of these claims, in light of what our
best theories of the compositional semantics of natural language, and in partic-
ular tense, tell us. Having briefly reviewed the theory of tense, I will present a
verysimplesentencewhichIclaimthestagetheoristwillnotbeabletodealwith
and show that this failure arises from a deep mismatch between what the stage
theorists need of a semantics of tense and what natural language supplies. The
conclusion will be that there’s good reason to doubt that the stage theorist will
be able to make good on their semantic claims, and thus, to the extent that these
claims are an important part of stage theory, good reason to think stage theory
false.
2.The Semantics of Tense
My aim in this paper is to consider to what extent the stage theorist’s semantic
claimsfitwiththemainviewsaboutthefunctioningoftenseinnaturallanguage
found in the literature. In this section, I will provide a brief overview of these
views.
There are two main views about the semantics of tense. On the one hand,
there is the view which has its roots in Priorean tense logic (see, e.g., Prior
1968, or Goranko & Galton 2015 for an overview) according to which expres-
sions which carry tense marking introduce temporal operators. As a first pass,
this would be to say that a sentence like
(2) Carrie swam
is well represented in tense logic as
(3) P (Carrie swim)
where ‘P’ is a past tense modal operator, the meaning of which could be glossed
as ‘it has at some time been the case that’. This functions like a possibility oper-
ator in alethic modal logic: it operates on an intension (a function from points
of evaluation to truth values; in the alethic case these points are worlds and in
the temporal case times) and maps it to true provided there is a time prior to
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 695
the utterance time such that the intension maps it to true, which is to say pro-
vided there is some time in the past at which the sentence is true. It thus has the
force, in the metalanguage in which the tense language is interpreted, of existen-
tialquantificationoverpasttimes(otheroperatorsareassociatedwithexistential
quantificationoverfuturetimes,andyetotherswithuniversalquantificationover
past and future times).
We could then say that there are temporal operators in natural language, so
that the syntactic logical form of our sentence would be (simplifying massively)
(4) [ [P [Carrie swim]]
s
In symbols, the semantic value of ‘P’ would be that of a modal operator as so:
P =λp<s,t>.λs. at some time before s, p(s)=1
(cid:74) (cid:75)
Using ‘s’ as a variable standing for times, this says that ‘P’ denotes something
which takes a function from times to true values (a temporal proposition) and
returns another temporal proposition which maps a time to true provided the in-
putpropositionmapssomepasttimetotrue. Onthisview,theobjectofsemantic
interpretation would be, essentially, a formula of Priorean tense logic.
There’s another way to go, though. We are familiar in formal semantics and
syntax with the idea of unprounced elements in a sentence. Thus, for example,
to account for natural language quantification in a neat, compositional way, we
assume that a sentence like
(5) Everybody swims
has a syntactic logical form like
[ [ Everybody] [ λ1. [t swims]]]
s np vp 1
That is, we assume that there is a covert element, a trace (in this case ‘t ’), in
1
the logical form of the sentence, which gets bound by the lambda term, so that
the VP denotes a function from objects to truth values (a property), and can then
serveastheinputtothesemanticvalueof‘everybody’, whichdenotesafunction
from properties to truth values.
But once one has made that move of allowing unpronounced elements into
the logical form to account for quantifier phrases, the option of doing the same
for tense arises. After all, there’s a sense in which just as ‘everybody’ quantifies
over people, so the past tense morphology ‘–ed’ in ‘jumped’ quantifies (existen-
tially) over past times. If we had covert time denoting variables, just as we have
covert object denoting variables, then we could account for the difference by
positing a logical form as so:
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
696 Matthew McKeever
∃t <u.λ1. Carrie jump(t )
1 1
Here ‘u’ stands for the utterance time, and—with a slight abuse of notation—
‘∃t <u’ here a function from properties of times to truth values (just as ‘every-
1
body’ denotes a function from properties of individuals to truth values).
Onewaytogetatthedistinctionistonotethatthereisaquestion,atthelevel
of logical form which serves as the object of semantic interpretation, of whether
the quantification over times is overt or covert. According to the quantifier ap-
proach, it’s overt, in the sense that there are temporal variables in the syntax
which get bound. According to the operator approach, it’s covert—there are no
such variables, but the truth conditions of the sentence involve quantification.
One might, for all that has been said so far, think that this is a distinction
without a difference. If all it comes down to is the positing or not of an anyway
unpronounced piece of syntax, one might think that we don’t have a very deep
or important issue on our hands.
But there’s more to it than that. Operators and quantifiers behave differently.
Notably, a quantifier can semantically affect a variable even if another quantifier
stands in its way, whereas modal operators, as standardly construed, affect the
formula they immediately scope over (Schlenker 2006: 507). Compare these two
formulas:
∀x∃y.F(x)
(cid:3) ♦
p
The former is true provided everything in the domain of quantification is
F; the presence of the vacuous existential quantifier makes no difference to the
interpretation of the formula. However, the same doesn’t hold for the second
formula: we can’t treat the diamond as if it were vacuous, in which case the
sentence would be true provided p was true at every world. That’s just not an
available reading, and it’s not available because a formula is always affected by
the modal which first scopes over it. Accordingly, here is a difference between
modal operators, as standardly conceived, and quantifiers.
We can then ask, how do temporal expressions fit in here? Do they exhibit
modal-like or quantifier-like behaviour? The linguistic data suggests the latter.
There are a range of constructions involving tense well captured in terms of
quantifiers but not well captured in terms of operators. Most relevant given the
aboveistheexistenceofsentencesinwhichatensedoesn’taffecttheintepretation
of an expression in its scope. The classical example in the literature comes from
Cresswell (1991):
(6) Some day, each of my students will be on the board of Linguistics And
Philosophy
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 697
Standard assumptions about scope would lead us to think that there are two
disambiguations of this sentence—a temporal de dicto one, in which the tense
expression ‘will’ scopes over the quantifier, and a temporal de re one, on which
the quantifier scopes over the ‘will’. Using ‘F’ for the operator which has future
existential truth conditions, we get
F (each of my students be on the board of Linguistics And Philosophy)
Each of my students F (x be on the board of Linguistics and Philosophy)
Theproblemisthatneitherofthesedisambiguationscapturethemostsalient
reading of the sentence. The most salient reading is that at some one point in
the future, each of the speaker’s current students will be on the board of the
journal—the speaker is imagining a situation in which his school rules supreme
by capturing the editorial board. Neither of the two readings above give us
this, however. The first reading gets us that at some time in the future, each
of the speaker’s then students will be on the board. That is, it talks about the
wrong students—the future ones, which are not necessarily the current ones.
The second reading has it that each of the speaker’s students are such that in the
future they’ll be on the board—but it doesn’t mean that all the students will be
on the board together: one could be on the board at t and only t , one at t and
2 2 3
only t , and so on. This doesn’t secure the editorial board domination reading
3
we’re looking for.
Ontheotherhand,ifoneweretoholdthattenseprovidesquantifiersbinding
temporal variables, then the situation is straightforward. We would have
∃t1>u. λ1. Each of my students(x) be on the board (t ) of Linguistics and
1
Philosophy
Ifxisatemporalvariableoccurringfree,thenitcangetitsvaluefromcontext,
so that the sentence is true provided at some future time, each of my current
students is on the board of Linguistics and Philosophy then. This is the correct
reading, and suggests that that the tenses behave like quantifiers rather than
operators (further reading here, in addition to the paper about to be mentioned,
is Schlenker 2006; Schaffer 2012; Kusumoto 2005; and references therein).
It only suggests it, however. Already in Cresswell (1991) it was realised that
with sufficient complexification, one can get something like an operator view
which will account for all the facts. Such a view requires the positing of a range
of new and suspiciously quantifier-looking temporal operators. In the face of
this, King has been lead to say,
Ifthecomplextemporalfactspresentinnaturallanguagearemostreadily
and easily represented by viewing tenses as involving explicit quantifica-
tion over time and as expressing relations between times, that is a good
reason for thinking that tenses really work this way. (2003: 218)
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
698 Matthew McKeever
I agree with this. For that reason, I will mostly concentrate on quantifica-
tional analyses of tense. However, both in the interests of exhaustiveness and
because at least Sider, at least sometimes, seems to be assuming an operator
analysis (1996: 450), I will discuss the operator theory as well. And I’ll consider
one other view, which is not to be found in the linguistics literature on tense but
which has been suggested to me by several people, including a referee for this
journal, and which indeed one can also find at Sider (1996: 450). 1
3.Against the Quantificational Analysis
Initially, things look good for the stage theorist. I’ll begin by showing how a
simplemodificationofthequantificationaltheoryoftensecancaptureasentence
like 1 from a stage-theoretic perspective.
We’ve already seen what the basic quantificational analysis of tense looks
like. Our sentence will have the logical form like so:
∃t <u.λ1. John be happy(t )
1 1
Now let’s see how to modify this in the spirit of the stage theorist. The key
thought behind stage theory is that a name like ‘John’ denotes different stages at
different times. On the other hand, the stage theorist doesn’t say that a predicate
like ‘happy’ has different extensions over time: they don’t need to, because it
can just stand for all the happy stages, past, present and future. So an obvious
thought is to say that it’s names which, contrary to appearances, have a place
for a variable. On this understanding, they would denote not objects, but non-
constant functions from times to stages. We’ll have
∃t <u. λ1. John(t ) be happy
1 1
Our sentence will be true provided there’s some time prior to the time of utter-
ance, such that applying it to the function denoted by ‘John’ gives a stage which
belongs in the set denoted by ‘happy’. And this captures the correct truth con-
ditions: the function applied to a past time will yield a past stage of John as is
required, and the sentence will be true if that stage possesses the property of
happiness.
The stage theorist can appeal to a simple and well motivated modification of
the semantics of tense to get the right results for basic tensed sentences. Next
we’ll see, however, that this modification can’t account for even slightly more
difficult sentences.
1.IthankarefereeforpointingoutthatSiderseemstopartiallyendorsethisview.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 699
3.1.A Problem
Consider the following sentence:
(7) Kant was born and died in Königsberg.
The first observation to make about this sentence is that the two verbs, roughly,
talk about different times: we’re not asserting that there’s some time such that
Kantwasbornanddiedthen. Rather,whatwe’resayingisthatthere’ssometime
in the past when we was born, and some other time in the past when he died.
In stage theory talk, that is to say that there’s some past stage of Kant which
was born, and some different past stage of Kant which died. So the sentence
is really talking about two past stages. My claim is that the stage theorist can’t
account for this, and for a very simple reason: there’s only one occurrence of
‘Kant’ in the sentence, so the sentence can only talk about one stage. Slightly
more technically, because there’s only one occurrence of ‘Kant’, there’s only one
unbound temporal variable in the sentence, which can only be bound by one of
the two past tense quantifiers. But that means the one which doesn’t do any
binding will be semantically inert, and so the sentence will not be able to talk, as
it needs to, about two different Kant stages.
Andthisreflectsafundamentalwayinwhichthetruthconditionsdemanded
by the metaphysics of stage theory don’t fit with the semantics of natural lan-
guage. For the stage theorist, the semantic point of tensed elements is to allow
us to talk about past and future stages, and not, as common sense might first
suggest, past and future events or states. But this is just not reflected in the
syntax, in which tensed elements form syntactic constituents with adjectives and
verbs, as in the adjectival phrase ‘was happy’ or the verb phrase ‘lived’, and do
not form syntactic constituents with names (there’s no such word as ‘Kanted’).
A consequence of this is that every finite verb must co-occur with some tense
expression, and so when we conjoin two finite verbs, we must have two tensed
elements. And this is where the problem arises, because there may be only one
name for it to semantically modify.
Let me first note that there’s no problem for the (unmodified) theory of tense
I’ve given. We’ll have the syntactic form, omitting brackets and labels to aid
parsing
∃t <u λ1.∃t2<u. λ2. Kant be born(t ) and die(t )
1 1 2
But now consider the stage theorist. The logical form must be something like
∃t <u λ1.∃t <u. λ2. Kant(?) be born and die
1 2
Thequestionmarkmustbereplacedwithatrace(eithert ort ),butit’sclear
1 2
that whatever quantifier we index it to, we’ll get the wrong result. Neither of the
two following truth conditions are correct:
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
700 Matthew McKeever
∃t ,t <u. Kant(t ) be born and die
1 2 1
∃t ,t <u. Kant(t ) be born and die
1 2 2
TheybotharetruejustincasethesamestageofKantpossessesboththeproperty
of being born in Königsberg and of dying in Königsberg. This is not the result
we were looking for.
3.2.An Attempted Solution
The problem arises because we don’t have enough names to go around: we need
two, which can be saturated by two different temporal variables, which can then
each be bound by a quantifier. A natural thought is that we could resolve this
issue by positing another referring expression in the syntax. The most natural
thought is that it be a variable-like element which could semantically depend on
the name, and in particular which could inherit the function the name denotes.
That is, we could posit a syntactic form like so:
∃t <u λ1.∃t <u. λ2. Kant(t ) be born and o(t ) die in Königsberg
1 2 1 2
where the variable ‘o’ anaphorically refers back to the function denoted by
‘Kant’. This would yield truth conditions equivalent to
∃t ,t <u. Born(Kant(t )) and Died(Kant(t ))
1 2 1 2
Which would secure the correct result. But there are solid syntactic and
semantic reasons to doubt that this approach can work. From the point of view
of syntax, it’s a familiar point that one can conjoin expressions of any syntactic
category,asthefollowinglistindicatesfornames,adjectives,auxiliaryverbs,and
adjectives:
(8) Kant and Hegel were philosophers
(9) The table was heavy and blue
(10) You can and must do it
(11) He danced skillfully and gracefully
There is thus good reason to take the surface form of 7 seriously and hold that it
is indeed a conjunction of tensed verbs. It would be surprising if one could not
conjoin them, as the stage theorist seems to demand. In the same vein, it seems
that we must hold this to be a case of verb conjunction to make sense of cases
like
(12) Kant caught and ate a deer.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 701
The reason there is pressure to hold that we have a conjunctive verb phrase
rather than a sentential conjunction is that both the verbs ‘caught’ and ‘ate’ are
transitive and thus look for an object. But the object of ‘caught’, on this view,
would be in a completely different sentence, and so the sentence should be as
anomalous as
(13) #Kant caught. He ate a deer.
Butitisn’t. Beforegoingon,letmewardoffanobjection. Theabovesentence
is bad because the syntactic object of ‘caught’ is not close enough for its denota-
tion to semantically interact with the denotation of ‘caught’. But it’s familiar to
syntacticians that there are constructions like this which are nevertheless accept-
able: this is the phenomenon of right node raising introduced into the literature
by Postal (1974), and exemplified by:
(14) John hates, but Mary loves, model theoretic semantics.
Weherehaveanintransitiveverbtheobjectofwhich,‘modeltheoreticsemantics’,
is in the wrong place, but the sentence is okay. One might think that the fact that
such constructions are okay gives the stage theorist an out: they could say that
what’s going on here is something like right node raising. But this isn’t hugely
convincing: most notably, it doesn’t seem like a case of right node raising. Our
example 12 doesn’t have the commas or intonation pattern distinctive of such
constructions.
But even if that were an acceptable response to this syntactic issue, there still
remains a more serious, semantic problem with the stage theorist’s position: the
strategy invoked here will get quantificational cases wrong. To see this, consider
(15) Everybody arrived and left safely.
In fact, to make things simpler, let’s consider a tenseless example (or rather pre-
tend that this is a tenseless example):
(16) Everybody grows and shrinks.
On the view we’re considering, this is equivalent to the following, where the
subscripts indicate binding:
(17) Everybody grows and t shrinks.
1 1
Butthere’saproblemhere. Inordertogetthereadingwhichwewant, itmustbe
the case that the quantifier ‘everybody’ binds the trace element t . But—at least
1
according to orthodoxy— a universal quantifier in one sentence cannot bind a
variable in another. The following is no good:
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
702 Matthew McKeever
(18) #Every girl arrived. Then she left.
If the covert trace strategy were correct, then we would also predict 15 to be no
good. Since we don’t, that’s a reason to doubt the covert trace strategy, and thus
the viability of the stage theorist’s response to our problem.
Here’s a response to the worry I just raised. There are some purported exam-
ples of cross-sentential binding of a pronoun by a universal quantifier. Here’s
one, from Barbara Partee via Roberts (1987):
(19) Every player choses a pawn. He puts it on square one.
One might try to argue that since such sentences are okay, we shouldn’t
overly worry about the fact that we’re forced to posit cross-sentential binding.
My response to this is to say that I doubt such sentences are okay—certainly
they’re much more marked and infrequent than more standard cases of binding.
And I think that’s sufficient to make it doubtful that the stage theorist can ap-
peal to such cases to motivate her view: if cross sentential binding of pronouns
by universal quantifiers is infrequent and marked, then sentences like 15 should
be infrequent and marked, but they are neither: they are both common and very
natural.
Accordingly, it appears that the semantic claims of stage theory cannot be
made to cohere with the quantificational view of tense. To the extent that we
follow linguists and philosophers of language who back that theory, we should
reject the semantic claims of stage theory. In the next sections, I will strengthen
the argument for this conclusion by showing that the semantic claims of stage
theory can’t be made to cohere with other views of tense.
4.Against the Modal Operator Analysis
Thefirststagesindevelopingamodaloperatoranalysisareclear. Wemakeasim-
ilar move to the one we made above, only now couched in terms of intensions.
Thus a standard analysis, as we’ve seen, would have it that names denote con-
stant functions from times to objects, and predicates denote non-constant func-
tions from times to extensions. The stage theorist’s analysis, on the other hand,
would modify this so that names denote non-constant functions from times to
stages, and predicates constant functions from times to the set of all the stages,
past, present or future, which satisfy the predicate.
But I think trying to develop the view any further, as in the quantificational
case, will cause problems. Indeed, I think the view will be subject to a problem
very similiar to the one faced by the quantificational theory. Firstly, think about
whatthelogicalformmustbelike. Inparticular,considerthecontributionwhich
‘was born and died’ makes to the logical form. There are two options—either it
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 703
contributes one tense operator, or it contributes two.
If it contributes one, we have something like
P (Kant be born and die in Königsberg)
This clearly gets the wrong result, as requiring that there be some one time
at which Kant both was born and died. On the other hand, if it contributes two,
things are not any better:
P(P(Kant be born and die in Königsberg)
Thisisn’ttherighttruthconditionseither: thisistrueprovidedthere’sapast
time such that there’s a time before it when Kant lived and died. It still requires
thattherebesomeonetimeatwhichKantbothlivedanddied,whichisnotwhat
we want.
Can we get past this problem? It seems what we would need is that the
two temporal operators each target one and only one verb. But since temporal
operators operate on the closest expression in their scope, we’d need to have one
of the operators be in the conjunction following ‘and’. That is, as a first pass
P(Kant be born and P(die in Königsberg))
But that’s no good—syntactically, it doesn’t make sense because ‘P’ is a sen-
tential operator, but what follows it is not a sentence but a verb phrase. What
would we need is to make what follows ‘P’ be a sentence, and indeed a sentence
which is at least truth conditionally equivalent to
Kant be born and P(Kant die in Königsberg)
Thiswillwork,atleastinallowingthepossibilityofspeakingoftwodifferent
Kantstages,butitfacesexactlythesameproblemwe’vegoneintoindetailabove:
there is no good reason to think that that is the structure of the sentence given to
us by syntax. In particular, the conjunction that occurs in ‘Kant lived and died
in Königsberg’ is a verb phrase conjunction and not, as required, a sentential
conjunction. Ultimately, then, I think the modal operator analysis is no better
than the quantificational one.
5.Against the Predicate Analysis
If the semantic claims of stage theory were true, then given what we know about
the semantics of tense, we should expect that they could be spelled out in terms
either of the operator or the quantifier theory of tense. Given that this is not so,
we should lower our credence in the semantic claims of stage theory.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
704 Matthew McKeever
However, it remains possible that such claims could be made true in a dif-
ferent way, with a different view about the semantics of tense. In this section I
want to consider a view which several people, including reviewers for this jour-
nal, have suggested has potential. Indeed, it can arguably found in Sider’s (1996:
450) comments on de re temporal predication. He considers a sentence like
(20) Clinton was once governer of Arkansas.
and suggests that we should analyse it as a predicating, of Clinton, the property
of previously being governer of Arkansas. That is, the tense in ‘was’ functions to
form a complex predicate, and does not, as on the other analyses, contribute
either a quantifier or an operator, with a semantic value that looks as so:
was governer of Akarkansas = λs. there’s a past stage I-related to s
(cid:74) (cid:75)
which possesses the being the governer of Arkansas
The name ‘Clinton’, in turn, when uttered at any given time, picks out the
stage of Clinton at that time.
On this view, it’s not that there are tenseless verbs which get acted upon by
either being associated with bound temporal variables (on the quantifier view
of tense) or by being in the scope of temporal operators (on the operator view).
Rather, Ithinkthebestwaytounderstandthisviewisthattensecarryingexpres-
sions like ‘was’ or the past tense morpheme ‘–ed’ are predicate modifiers, that is,
expressions which take a predicate to yield a predicate.
This view, it should be clear, will resolve the problem which this paper is
centred around. The truth conditions of 7 will be that it’s true provided Kant
has a past stage which was born in Königsberg, and a past stage which died in
Königsberg, and this is exactly the right result.
So far, so good. But I think a little attention will show us why this is ul-
timately not a viable account of how temporal information gets expressed in
natural language. The crucial observation that will enable us to see this is that
thetenseofaverbsystematicallyaffectsotherelementsofthesentence,butpred-
icate modifiers don’t behave like this.
An example will show this. I’m a warden talking about a prison break that
happened this morning. Consider two scenarios: in the first, the prisoners who
tried to escape were caught. I describe this situation by saying,
(21) Every fugitive was recaptured.
In the second scenario, I have been less successful: I didn’t recapture any
prisoners. I utter,
(22) Every fugitive was born in Toronto.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 705
Thesearebothperfectlyfine, naturalsentences. Butthey’renotablydifferent.
In the first, we are talking about former fugitives who have now been caught.
That is to say, we are using an expression ‘fugitives’ to pick out not the current
fugitives, but past fugitives. By contrast, in the second scenario, we are talking
about current fugitives. Any theory of tense must respect the fact that we can
get both readings.
Now the reader’s first thought would be that we can explain this in terms
of scope. In our first sentence, the tense introduced by ‘was’ scopes over the
universal quantifier, and in the second, the quantifier scopes over the tense.
But I just don’t see how to make sense of that on this view without collaps-
ing it into either an operator or a quantificational theory. The key reason why
the quantificational and operator theory can appeal to scope is because on such
views tenses, although apparently predicative, actually introduce expressions
which apply to sentences, namely either quantifiers with times in their domain
or operators which operate on temporal propositions. If the predicate view is
to be different—and it needs to be, because the other two views don’t work—it
can’t say anything like this.
But then it won’t be the case that we can account for both sentences. In
particular, 21 will be the problem. The truth conditions we can get for it is
that every fugitive is such that they have a past temporal part which possesses
the property of being recaptured. But this is—absent any further story—talking
about the current fugitives. That’s not what we want—we want to talk about the
people who were fugitives at the time the verb is, intuitively speaking, ‘about’,
namely the time of the recapturing. That is to say, we want the interpretation of
the verb to affect that of the noun phrase ‘every fugitive’. I just don’t see how
this can be if ‘was recaptured’ simply expresses the property of having previously
been captured. 2 Accordingly, I don’t think the predicate analysis is viable.
Before finishing, let me say something about David Lewis’s counterpart the-
ory of modality. A referee suggested the following worry with my paper: if my
argumentisright,thenitshouldapplyalsotocounterparttheory. Inparticular,if
we were to try to develop a formal semantics for natural language in the spirit of
counterpart theory, a sentence like ‘Kant could have been a musician and could
have been a singer’ would run into exactly the same problem I presented above:
we would need to look to two counterparts, but there is only one occurrence of
the name ‘Kant’ in the sentence. Given this, it might seem strange that I didn’t
urge this as an objection to counterpart theoretic semantics more generally, be
they temporal or alethic.
There are several reasons why I wrote the paper I did. The main one is that
2.AndnotethatintheSiderpassagejustmentioned,todealwithanessentiallysimilar
issue,heexplicitlyintroducessententialpasttenseoperators;we’veseenabovethatthatmove
won’twork.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
706 Matthew McKeever
I felt less sure about the data in the case of alethic modality: while it’s beyond
doubt that ‘Kant lived and died in Königsberg’ is a fine sentence, ‘Kant could
have been a musician and could have been a singer’ is a bit clunky. Second,
the syntax is also cleaner in the temporal case: it’s again beyond doubt that
tensed elements like ‘–ed’ operate directly on verbs, and while I think it’s also
clear that modal auxilaries like ‘could’ or ‘might’ do so too, it’s more open to
doubt (we might be tempted to say that there’s a covert big PRO somewhere,
for example). For these reasons I concentrated on stage theory. Nevertheless, I
am tempted to think that the line of argument developed here does apply also to
modal counterpart theory; but that’s work for another paper.
6.Conclusion
The stage theorist, then, can’t deal with our simple sentence. One might think
that I haven’t conclusively shown this—that it’s possible that with sufficient in-
genuity, the friend of stages will be able to come up a theory of tense that can
avoid the problem I’ve posed. But I think there’s good reason to be pessimistic
about this. For stage theory’s inability to deal with our sentence derives from a
deepandfundamentalfactaboutlanguage,namely,andaswe’veseen,thattense
elementsmodifyverbsandnotnounphrases. Butthestagetheoristiscompelled
to say that such elements semantically work on noun phrases, to enable us to
talk about past and future stages of objects. This mismatch between what stage
theorists require of the semantics of tense, and what natural language actually
delivers, rendersstagetheoryvulnerabletoproblemsliketheoneI’vesuggested,
and supplies a good reason to disbelieve it.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Herman Cappelen, Josh Dever, Derek Ball, Ofra Magidor,
audiences at the 2015 SPA in Glasgow, the 2016 Joint session in Cardiff, Arché,
and CSMN, and several anonymous referees and the Ergo area editor for helpful
comments on the material in this paper. I would also like the thank the AHRC
and the Royal Institute Of Philosophy for funding this research.
References
Cresswell, M. J. (1991). Entities and Indicies. Kluwer.
Goranko, Valentin and Antony Galton (2015). Temporal Logic. In Ed-
ward N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2015
ed.). Retrieved from https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2015/entries/
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017
·
A Semantic Problem For Stage Theory 707
logic-temporal/
Hawley, Katherine (2001). How Things Persist. Oxford University Press.
King, Jeffrey C. (2003). Tense, Modality, and Semantic Values. Philosophical Per-
spectives, 17(1), 195–246.
Kusumoto, Kiyomi (2005). On the Quantification Over Times in Natural Lan-
guage. Natural Language Semantics, 13(4), 317–357.
Postal, Paul Martin (1974). On Raising: One Rule of English Grammar and Its Theo-
retical Implications. MIT Press.
Prior, A. N. (1968). Papers on Time and Tense. Oxford University Press.
Roberts, Craige (1987). Modal Subordination, Anaphora, and Distributivity (Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation). University of Massichusetts Amherst.
Schaffer, Jonathan (2012). Necessitarian Propositions. Synthese, 189(1), 119–162.
Schlenker, Philippe (2006). Ontological Symmetry in Language: A Brief Mani-
festo. Mind and Language, 21(4), 504–539.
Sider, Theodore(1996). AlltheWorld’saStage. AustralasianJournalofPhilosophy,
74(3), 433–453.
Sider, Theodore (2001). Four Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time.
Oxford University Press.
· ·
Ergo vol. 4, no. 24 2017