Aporia, Vol.1, No. 1 (FaU 1991)
Husserl and Meaning
Karl Shurts
Edmund Husserl's phenomenology is an attempt to explain the
relationship between consciousness and the world. Using the
concept of noema, he articulates a theory of perception accounting not
only for visual perception, but for all other acts ofc onsciousness as well.
In this theory, all acts of consciousness are intentional and therefore
interpretations. Because of this, his theory has some interesting impli
cations in meaning theory, specifically textual interpretation. Husserl
escap)es radical relativism by linking acts of consciousness to inten
tional objects through noemata, or intensional entities. There may be
many interpretations of an object, or a text in this case, however each
will always be in some way related to the text Not just anything
someone says about a text will be an actual interpretation of that text.
This will become clearer as we examine Husserl's theory of intention-
ality.
The fundamental concept in Husserl's theory of intentionality is
the noema. In order to gain a general understanding of the noema, we
will first define it in terms of visual perception, keeping, in mind that
perception for Husserl is not restricted to sight. Aron Gurwitsch defines
the noema as' "the object as it is intended', i.e., as the object in question
appearing in a certain manner of presentation... an object capable... of
appearing in different manners of presentation"( 1982,65). The noema
is not itself the object,b ut it is the object as it is perceived,i .e., perceived
in one manner rather than another. Because an object can be perceived
in different ways, from different points of view, there will be many
noemata referring to the same object. For example, although there is
only one tree standing before me, there are many different ways of
looking at it, e.g., from the north side, from the south side, from the air,
etc.
These several ways of looking at the tree, these noemata, are
grouped around a central core-stratum to which they all relate. This
core-stratum is not itself the object, rather the relations between the
multiplicity of noemata involved in viewing a single object (Husserl
43
1982,218 & §97). By stating this, Husserl is able to account for several
different acts of perception involving the same object. For example,
though I may see the tree from the north and later the south side,t hereby
experiencing different perceptual acts with different noemata,1 can still
say that I see the same tree by virtue of this core-stratum. This complex
structure is the unity of consciousness.
Having distinguished between the noema and the actual object, we
must now mention a third distinction, the act ofp erception itself. For
every perceptual act there is one and only one noema.T he noema is not
itself the act, nor is it ontologically dependent upon the act. Visual
perception exists in space and time; when I see,I always see some thing,
some where,s ome time. However,t he noema is an ideal, abstract entity
existing neither spatially nor temporally. For example, if the tree I am
looking at is destroyed, the noema involved in the perceptual act will
continue to exist (237).
Up until now we have used the term 'perception' in the usual sense
to gain a basic understanding of the noema. However, as we mentioned
earlier, Husserl does not restriet his definition of perception to sight.
Rather, he uses the term acts of consciousness to include all other
perceptions:f orexample,r emembering,i magining,h allucinating,d ream
ing.
The structure ofc onsciousness is critical to Husserl's system.E ach
act of consciousness, like the perceptual act, has a noema, therefore, it
is intentional. It is intended, or directed toward an object. This object
need not be a tree or any physical object, it could be a memory, an
abstract thought, a fictional story, etc. In each case, the object is called
the intentional or intented object because it is intended by someone,b y
a consciousness,s o to speak. Consciousness,f or Husserl,i s intentional,
i.e., it is always conscious of something. This is the fundamental
structure of consciousness for Husserl.
Another important aspect of consciousness, specifically involv
ing visual perception,i s its ability to make sense of,o r objectivate" raw
sense data," or hyle by referring them to their object. Husserl wants to
distinguish between non-intentional sti^, and acts of intention or
perceptioa The hyle are more or less moments,o r phases in a perceptual
act that are given sense, or meaning by virtue of the noematic structure
of consciousness:
We find such concrete really immanental Data as components in more
44
inclusive concrete mental processes which are intentive as wholes;
and, more particularly, we find those sensuous moments overlaid by
a stratum which, as it were," animates," which bestows sense... —a
stratum by which precisely the concrete intentive mental process
arises from the sensuous which has in itself nothing pertaining to
intentionality. (Husserl 1982,203)
This idea ofc onsciousness giving meaning to sense data is reminis
cent of Kant and his a priori categories. How does Husserl's account
differ from Kant's? Kant posits the "thing-in-itself," or the noumenon
that is then filtered through the a priori categories oft he mind producing
a phenomenon.T he "thing-in-itself'i s never experienced. However,i n
Husserl's case, there is no noumenon, nor are there a priori categories
to be imposed upon it. Our knowledge of the object is transcendental in
that the object ofi ntention and the actual thing out there in the world are
not to be distinguished from one another( Smith and Mclntyre [quoting
Husserl] 1982, 85).
Nevertheless, Husserl wants to maintain this distinction between
"sensuous data" and intentional acts, or acts of consciousness. How
ever,u nlike Kant who maintains thate very perceptual act has a noumenon
as its foundation, Husserl remains undecided as to whether all acts of
consciousness must have a hyletic foundation. He leaves this possibil
ity,o pen continuing to affirm the importance ofh yle in phenomenology:
On the other hand, we leave it undecided at first if the characteristics
essentially making up intentionality can have concreteness without
having sensuous foundation. Be that as it may,t his remarkableduality
and unity ofs ensuous and intentive plays a dominant role in the whole
phenomenological sphere Phenomenological considerations and
analyses which specifically concern stuff [raw sense data] can be
termed hyletic-phenomenological ones just as, on the other hand,
those relative to the noetic moments can be termed noetic-phenom-
enological considerations and analyses. (Husserl 1982,204-7)
Therefore, acts of consciousness are always directed toward some
thing, not to an unknowable entity as in Kant. This directedness or
intentionality is the foundation of phenomenology: "to the things
themselves." This is clearly Husserl's point of view:" The concept of
intentionality, apprehended in its undetermined range, as we have
apprehended it,i s a whoUy indispensable fundamental concept which is
45
the starting point at the beginning of phenomenology" (202).
Before we can see how Husserl's theory applies to textual interpre
tation, we must further define Husseil's concept of noema. Husserl
discusses two aspects or components of the noema: Sinn and Gegeben-
heitsweise. Generally, Sinn is the component that accounts for an act's
directedness to its object and can be shared by other noemata having the
same object. This sharing is essential to the core-stratum and the unity
ofc onsciousness mentioned earlier, which enable us to be conscious of
an object in different modes, yet still refer the same thing. For example,
I may look at a tree from one side and later from another, each of these
acts has a noema which in turn have their Sinns. However,i n this case,
the two acts ofj )erception share the Sinn by virtue of the intended object
and the unity ofc onsciousness (Husserl 1982,§ 97). Although the term
'Sinn' is used by Husserl to denote a component of the noema,i t is also
used to refer to the whole noema itself.
Gegebenheitsweise accounts for the way,o r mode,i n which an act
correlates to its object. It is the aspect that grants the noema its
individuality in that it is not shared by other noemata with the same
intentional object This mode, or way of appearance is the act's thetic
character. For example, referring to the tree mentioned earlier, I may
actually look at it from several different angles on one day, see it in a
picture on another, or simply think of it later on. All of these acts have
different thetic characters. The ways in which they appear are different
in every case. This Gegebenheitsweise, or "way of givenness," is
different in each case, thus accounting for the individuality of each act
ofc onsciousness.T hese noemata are thus related through theirS inn,a nd
unrelated in their mode of appearance. In this way,n o two noemata wiU
ever be exactly the same. This distinction wiU be important later in our
discussion of textual interpretation.
With respect to meaning theory,t he noema,a s an intentional entity
is another term for meaning in general. Husserl says: "The noema is
nothing but a generalization of the idea of meaning( Sinn)t o the field of
all acts"( Fpllesdal [quoting Husserl] 1982, 74). In German,S inn can
mean "sense,"" meaning," or even "mind." Sinn, as mentioned earlier,
can also be a synonym for the whole noema, according to Husserl. It
need not be restricted to a single component of the noema. The noema,
then, because it is intentional or directed by someone to something,i s a
meaning, a volition or willing (Husserl 1982, 233). It is also then, an
interpretation because it is intending one meaning rather than another.
46
For example, in my viewing of the tree from the north side, I interpret
the tree as a tree seen from the north side and not from some other
perspective.
From our discussion oft he noema,i t follows that every intentional
act of consciousness is a meaning and therefore, an interpretation. In
other words,e very act of consciousness, with its noema,t hat we intend
is also an interpretation of an intentional object, or the thing intended.
Husserl distinguishes here between an inten/ional object,o r the thing in
actuality, and an intentional entity, or the full noema.
Husserl believes that these intensional entities can be expressed in
language. For him,e very linguistic expression is an intensional entity,
or noema expressed. This meaning expressed in language is called a
Bedeutung, as opposed to the Sinn of a noema. Both are meanings; the
former is characterized as expressed, the latter is not defined in terms of
linguistic expression. Meaning does not lie in the words expressed,
rather they are an integral part of noemata, which are in tum aspects of
our mental processes. For Husserl,l anguage serves to make public the
intentional acts of consciousness: "All expressions in communicative
speech function as indications. They serve the hearer as signs of the
"thoughts" of the speaker, i.e., of his meaning-giving (sinngebenden)
mental processes (psychischen Erlebnisse)" (Smith and Mclntyre
[quoting Husserl] 1982, 83).
These meaning-giving mental processes involve consciousness'
ability to objectivate, give meaning, or make sense of objects toward
which they are directed. Much like consciousness gives meaning to
hyletic data, it also gives meaning to words.T he meaning it gives is the
Sinn or the intensional noema, and the meaning expressed is the
Bedeutung. Words are animated, so to speak, by virtue of the noematic
structure of consciousness. Husserl explains:
In speaking we are continuously performing an internal act of mean
ing (act of meaning=Meinen), which fuses with the words and, as it
were, animates them. The effect of this animation is, that the words
and the entire locution, as it were, embody in themselves a meaning
(Meinung),a nd bear it embodied in them as their sense( Sinn).[ In] the
act of meaning (Meinen) ... there is constituted ... the meaning
(Meinung)—that is, the Bedeutung, the Sinn—expressed in the
locution.( Smith and Mclntyre [quoting Husserl] 1982, 85)
Although Husserl says that every linguistic expression is a noematic
47
Sinn expressed, the Gegebenheitsweise or thetic character the other
component of the noema, is not expressed in language. In fact, it can
never be expressed except within a different" speech-act"m entioning or
describing the thetic character other. The latter act always takes place
earlier than the former in time. For example,i fI say" That man is a good
writer," the thetic character is the unsaid "I judge that..." aspect. This
aspect can only be expressed by saying another sentence:" Ij udged that
this man is a good writer." However,w e note that even this last sentence
has itself a thetic character: "Ij udge that I judge that..." which is not
expressed in the words. Husserl maintains that although the thetic
character of a noema is not expressed, it remains an essential part oft he
noema and therefore the linguistic expression as well. The thetic
character is, as it were," understood," and essential to the meaning given
to the linguistic expression.
Another important point should be mentioned here regarding
meaning. Although Bedeutung is a noematic Sinn expressed linguisti
cally, it remains essentially part of the noema, which is an ideal entity.
Therefore, we might ask at this point how we could ever know this ideal
meaning in order to express it in language. To answer this question,
Husserl discusses what he calls phenomenological reduction. The
ability to bridge the gap between this ideal entity and language rests in
the noema's close relationship to consciousness. Phenomenological
reduction is consciousness' ability to know noemata and thereby be able
to express them linguistically. Although acts of consciousness and
noemata remain ontologically different, as stated earlier, their exis
tences coincide so closely that we never find an act of consciousness
without a noema to accompany it.
This point has many implications in meaning theory. Meaning is
not a part of the words expressed, rather it is a part of the underlying
noema which animates those words. This noema is or comes to be in
conjunction with an act of consciousness; one is never found without
the other. Furthermore, this act is always directed toward an intentional
object as such. Thus, meaning and interpretation do not exist outside of
this intimate, complex relationship between noema, act of conscious
ness and intended object.
Specifically, how does all this relate to textual interpretation? For
Husserl,l ike anything else, a text can also be an intentional object.T hus,
a text does not itself have meaning,s ince meaning lies in the noema of
the act ofr eading,i nterpreting,e tc. If this is the case, and meaning does
48
not lie in the text, how does Husserl's theory avoid radical relativism, if
at an? How does his theory prevent anyone from saying that anyone's
and everyone's interpretation of a text is correct since the text itself
cannot serve as a criterion for verification?
First ofa U, Husserl's theory is not itself concerned with the idea of
"correctness"o r" verification." For him,t here are simply different acts
ofc onsciousness having different noemata, which are in turn composed
of both common and imshared components. His main point is that each
noema is an interpretation, a meaning.T o generate a theory ofi nterpre
tation from his philosophy is not an easy task. However,a n answer to the
question of relativism asked earlier may be found within the relationship
between noema, act and intentional object
As mentioned earlier it is possible for me to have several acts of
consciousness with equal or differing thetic characters directed toward
one intended object. It is consciousness' ability to unify that enables me
to say that I "perceive" the same object This is the noetic core-stratum
ofc onsciousness.T herefore,i t follows that I may have several different
interpretations, meanings,o r noemata of a text yet still refer to the same
text.T he interpretations will be different in terms oft hetic character and
perspective, so to speak. However, it may be that because of this core-
stratum and the fact that my interpretations are always directed toward
a specific object, i.e. the text, that I am not able to say just anything. All
my interpretations have something in common:a noematic relationship
with the object to which they are intended. Granted, interpretations are
relative to each person's perspective in an act of interpretation, but not
radically relative to anything that anyone would want to say.
Husserl's point is that each perspective is related not only to the act
ofi nterpretation,b ut also to the text itself. In this way each interpretation
will always be related and thus grounded in the relationship it has with
the text
This may account for differing interpretations within one person's
consciousness, however, how do we account for differing interpreta
tions among different people? The answer seems to be linked with
linguistic expression. According to Husserl's theory, two people could
be intending the same object, but from the same or different perspec
tives. Whether their thetic characters correspond to each other or not is
not important: e.g., I could think of an object and someone could be
looking at it directly, yet the intentional object would essentially be the
same.T he difference would lie in the intentionality, in that I perceive it
49
in this manner, and he perceives it in this other manner.
Husseil might say that it is through language that we come to
understand that we both intend the same object by virtue of the noema,
or Sinn of each act of consciousness that can be expressed in language.
Therefore, in terms of textual interpretation, I can know through
language whether someone is intending the same text that I am. In this
case,i f someone were to say that this essay talks about chicken soup,I
could construe either that he is wrong, or that he is intending another
object,i maginary,a bstract or whatever. Husserl would probably say that
the latter is the case.
Therefore,i t appears that the boundaries or parameters that enable
Husserl to escape radical relativism are the objects of intention them
selves by virtue oft heir being intended by a consciousness coupled with
their noematic Sinn expressed in language. These parameters are not at
all sharp and distinct as they are in an objective theory of interpretation
where a single meaning is inherent in the text. Meanings are there, but
they are not in the text, nor are they solely in consciousness. Rather they
exist in the relationship between the text and the person in the form of
intentionality.
One final point should be made about Husserl's theory of meaning.
Although he does state that every noematic Sinn can be expressed in
language, he does not say that every Sinn has found expression or that
the human mind has the capability to express them all:
There is... no intrinsic connection between the ideal unities which in
fact operate as meanings( Bedeutungen),a nd the signs to which they
are tied.... We cannot therefore say that all ideal unities of this sort are
expressed meanings. Wherever a new concept is fonned, we see how
a meaning becomes realized that was previously unrealized. As
numbers—in the ideal sense that arithmetic presupposes—neither
spring forth nor vanish with the act of enumeration,... so it is with
... meanings... to which being thought or being expressed are alike
contingent. There are therefore countless meanings which ... are
merely possible ones, since they are never expressed, and since they
can, owing to the limits of man's cognitive powers, never be ex
pressed. (Smith and Mclntyre [quoting Husserl] 1982,88)
Therefore, not only can there be several interpretations of a given
text, but there also remains many potential interpretations of the same
text.T hus,n ot only can we have several interpretations of,s ay the Bible,
50
but we will continually be able to discover new interpretations that have
not as of yet been expressed. This theory seems to pull the rug out from
under anyone who would claim to have the final and definitive interpre-
ation of any given text
T0 conclude,H usserl's theory ofi ntentionality is powerful not only
in that it allows for many interpretations of a text, but it avoids radical
relativism by grounding acts of consciousness, or interpretations in the
text itself as an intentional object and in the noema,t he text interpreted
as such. This relationship binds aU textual interpretations to the text in
question, eliminating claims that any interpretation whatsoever is valid.
Bibliography
Husserl,E dmund.I deas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book: General
Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans, by Kersten F
London: Martin Nijhoff Publishers, 1982.
Gurtwitsch,A ron."Husserl's T heory ofthe Intionality ofC onsciousness."
inHusserl,I ntentionality and Cognitive Science,e d. by Hubert
L. Dreyfus. Cambridge: MIT, 1982.
F0llesdal,Dagfina"HusserrsNotionofNoema."in//itfjer/,/n/enriomz/-
ityandCognitiveScience, ed.b y HubertL.D reyfus. Cambridge:
MIT, 1982.
Smith,D avid Woodruffa nd Ronald Mclntyre.H usserl andIntentionality:
A Study ofMind,M eaning,a nd Language. Holland: D. Reidel
Publishing Company, 1982.
51