AporiaVol. 17 number 1—2007
Denying Objectivity to Arrive at Christianity:
An Analysis of the Postscript
STEVENA. SNELL
S
ØREN Kierkegaard focused much of his religious writings on two ques-
tions: What does it mean to be a Christian? And how do I become one?
Fashioning himself after Socrates, a teacher whom he revered for helping peo-
ple to discover the truth for themselves, Kierkegaard preferred anonymity
over fame. He accordingly wrote the Concluding Unscientific Postscriptfrom the
viewpoint of a fictional person named Johannes Climacus, an “ordinary”
thirty-year-old man who was “born and bred” in Copenhagen (15). The
Postscript, Kierkegaard’s final attempt to anonymously redirect his contem-
poraries, explores the distinction between objective and subjective truth.
A culminating theme in the work is whether one can build an eternal hap-
piness on historical knowledge. By historical knowledge, Climacus1refers
to concrete facts that we can know through objective study. He unleashes
an arsenal of arguments to prove that faith in Jesus Christ is utterly incon-
gruent with objectivity. His various arguments reveal a central belief that
though objective truth is valuable in many spheres, it inherently clashes with
faith because it denies faith of the passion necessary to pursue salvation. Two
of Climacus’s most compelling arguments are the passion-venture argument
and the inspiration argument.2This paper sets forth the structure of these
1 Given the divergent views of Kierkegaard’s many pseudonyms, I attribute the ideas and concepts
forwarded within the Postscriptto Climacus rather than to Kierkegaard himself.
2 I take the names and outlines of these arguments from Professor David L. Paulsen of the BYU
Philosophy Department.
Steven Snell is a student at Brigham Young University majoring in political science.
Upon graduation, Steven plans to attend law school and then pursue a career in the
public sector. This essay won third place in the 2007 David H. Yarn Essay Contest.
46 STEVENA. SNELL
arguments and discusses how both attempts at objectivity not only fail to
arrive at Christianity, but actually inhibit potential Christians from develop-
ing true Christian faith.
The passion-venture argument is powerful because it attacks the
essence of the objective route to faith. Climacus charges that objective
inquiry strips away the passion necessary for faith. The passion-venture
argument is as follows:
(1) Authentic Christian faith is directly proportional to the pas-
sion of the believer.
(2) But a believer’s passion is directly related to his objective
uncertainty.
(3) The aim of objective inquiry is to decrease objective uncer-
tainty.
(C) Objective inquiry and authentic Christian faith are incom-
mensurable.
To properly treat the first premise, authentic Christian faith should
be distinguished from its lesser forms. Climacus laments that most
Europeans assume Christianity “as given” (50). He calls this “faith taken in
vain,” since such self-identified Christians only assume the Christian title
because all of their friends are alleged Christians or because they are citi-
zens of a purportedly Christian nation (31). To be sure, this brand of
Christianity, a product of mere association, falls far short of authentic
faith. Those who only emptily call themselves Christian—perhaps because
of societal norms—lack inwardness and passion. They do not make any
great sacrifice for faith, nor are they willing to compromise their comfort-
able lifestyle in any way that society does not demand. Their faith is limited
by indifference, and their lukewarm form of Christianity lacks the power to
move mountains or to make these Christians into apostles.
Climacus says authentic Christian faith requires “infinite, personal,
impassioned interestedness” (29). Whereas vain believers are crippled
by a lack of passion, authentic believers have sufficient passion to commit
themselves to the pursuit of an eternal happiness. He argues that this
pursuit requires immense passion precisely because it is a paradox to most
DENYINGOBJECTIVITYTOARRIVEATCHRISTIANITY 47
people (205). The more passion believers have, the greater will be their
faith and their propensity to imitate Christ and pursue his happiness. That
is, as stated in the first premise of the passion-venture argument, passion
breeds authentic Christian faith.
Having established that passion is prerequisite for authentic faith, we
now ask how prospective Christians can acquire sufficient passion. Climacus
insists that people cannot develop adequate passion through study. He
believes that faith can never be the result of “straightforward scholarly delib-
eration” or any other direct means (29). On the contrary, Climacus asserts,
“Christianity is spirit; spirit is inwardness; inwardness is subjectivity; sub-
jectivity is essentially passion, and at its maximum an infinite, personally
interested passion for one’s eternal happiness” (33). This formula highlights
the role of subjectivity in developing proper passion.
But why must passion must be grounded in subjectivity? Climacus says
it is because “all essential decision is rooted in subjectivity” (33). For
Climacus, the essential decision refers to ethico-religious truth that leads to
salvation. He believes that would-be Christians must follow the essential
truth at every turn. This pursuit requires something greater than the
axioms and rules of calculation which govern worldly decision. Because
essential decision is rooted in subjectivity, the faithful need personal expe-
rience and an individual God-relationship in order to continue toward
their celestial goal. The passion which flows from such subjectivity moti-
vates Christians toward salvation when objectivity fails. Climacus is not
arguing that subjectivity saves men and women. Nevertheless, he contends
that “an eternal happiness is a question only for the impassioned, infinitely
interested subjectivity” (32). That is, while subjectivity is not sufficient for
salvation, Climacus deems it necessary.
Objectivity is the antithesis of subjectivity. Rather than draw
strength in its believer-specific significance, objective inquiry requires
external validity through experiments and proofs. The final premise in
the passion-venture argument reminds us that the mission of objective
inquiry is to remove all uncertainty and leave the investigator with a sys-
tem of truths that can be universally confirmed. If people are interested in
applying objective inquiry to their faith, they must first forget what they
know through subjectivity and then seek to reestablish the truth of their
beliefs through replicable proofs and external experimentation.
48 STEVENA. SNELL
Climacus concludes that this is exactly the problem: objective inquiry
and authentic Christian faith are incommensurable because the former
seeks to eliminate the objective uncertainty that is necessary for the latter.
Applying objective inquiry deprives faith of its passion and sets faith equal
to a mathematical equation or any other objective statement that speaks
nothing to the essential decision of salvation. Climacus considers believers
who try to eliminate all uncertainty from their system of beliefs to be
sadly comic (211).
But can a limited amount of objective inquiry at least provide a foun-
dation for faith? Climacus does not think so. He says that as soon as
matters of faith are treated objectively, they lose passion and infinite
interest (31). Climacus further argues, “The more objective the observer
becomes, the less he builds an eternal happiness, that is, his eternal happi-
ness, on his relation to his observation, because an eternal happiness is a
question only for the impassioned, infinitely interested subjectivity” (32).
In sum, the passion-venture argument says that objective inquiry dooms
authentic Christian faith because it chases out the uncertainty necessary
for faith-building passion.
This argument is very compelling. As a Christian missionary I was
charged to relay to strangers the doctrines I hold as truths. The missionary
program, as modeled after scripture, emphasizes objective uncertainty.
Various scriptural passages that shape the missionary teaching method,
like those found in the Book of Mormon (Moroni 10:5) and in the Bible
(John 14:26) promise that the Holy Ghost will reveal the truth of all things
to every diligent seeker. Far from an objective inquiry, which aims to elim-
inate all subjectivity, we invited those who would hear us to engage in a
profoundly subjective inquiry—a process that required them to evaluate
our message personally and then to pray to God to know its truthfulness.
We later returned to ask them what responses they received. Those who
plunged into the subjective, reading scripture and praying daily, bridled
their objective uncertainty in a way that fostered faith-building passion.
They exhibited authentic Christian faith in their actions and continue to
manifest their commitment to Christianity. Contrastingly, others we vis-
ited were obsessed with the objective uncertainties before them. They
engaged us in long discussions in order to increase their objective certainty.
Climacus would call this exercise futile because he says that there is no
DENYINGOBJECTIVITYTOARRIVEATCHRISTIANITY 49
objective truth in Christianity (224). I also found that trying to transfer my
understanding of a doctrine to these people never generated any passion in
them. Passion comes from within and cannot be inserted into another’s life.
The dispassionate people I met refused to embrace objective uncertainty; as
a result, they did not reach authentic Christian faith.
A clever opponent of this argument might counter that removing
some of the objective uncertainty surrounding Christianity would make it
an easier sell. Imagine that we could confirm every word of the gospels,
pinpoint the locations of every scene hallmark to Christianity, trace the
succession of Christ’s power from His day until ours, and so forth. Would
such certainty cultivate greater faith? It does not seem likely. If this
increased objective certainty made any contribution to Christianity, it
would only add to the throngs of vain believers. Climacus seems to agree.
He argues that “it becomes more difficult year by year” to become a
Christian because it has now “become so easy” (215). Nevertheless, a full
comprehension of the dialogue does not guarantee its truthfulness. That is,
even if we could confirm all of the objective truths that frame Christianity,
the source of faith would still be the remaining objective uncertainty.
People would not derive faith from these objective truths, but from their
subjective understanding of the incarnation, sacrifice, and mercy of
God—those things which can never be established objectively.
We now move to a second argument against an objective route to
faith. Bearing significant resemblance to the passion-venture argument,
the inspiration argument also reveals a conflict between that which can be
known objectively, historicity, and that which can only be known subjec-
tively, inspiration. The argument is as follows:
(1) Authentic Christian faith requires acceptance of the inspi-
ration of the scriptures.
(2) Inspiration cannot be determined by objective historical
inquiry.
(3) Hence authentic Christian faith cannot be based upon
objective historical inquiry.
Christianity does not make sense to rational people because it has
at its core the paradox that God entered time and became a mortal (217).
50 STEVENA. SNELL
By our understanding, this is absurd, but this paradox is laid out in the scrip-
tures.The same scriptures also give us the words of God and several models
for how to live as Christians. Without these inspired aids, people would be
left to their own devices. Thankfully though, this is not the case. God pre-
pared a way to knowledge through the scriptures. By studying the inspired
words of God, readers can begin to form an understanding of the Christian
paradox and their relationship to God. Inspired scriptures are necessary
then to inform and direct authentic Christian faith. They provide a founda-
tion on which Christians can build their eternal happiness.
The second premise in the inspiration argument calls into question
the scope of historical inquiry. Climacus says that historical inquiry natu-
rally turns to the holy scriptures to determine what Christianity is and is
not (23). To secure this inquiry, it becomes necessary to ensure that the
holy scriptures, understood in the Concluding Unscientific Postscript as
the Bible alone, are indeed inspired. What a daunting task for histori-
cal inquiry: to prove the divinity of some sixty-six volumes! Many would
use critical theology to establish the Bible’s inspiration, but Climacus wor-
ries about this method. He likens critical theology to a philologist that
dedicates his life to the publication of a book by Cicero. If the man were
to exercise every academic caution and employ all of the most advanced
techniques in hermeneutics, the book would be true to the author, but it
would contribute nothing to the eternal happiness of humankind (25–26).
Climacus worries that critical theology similarly assumes too much—that
sufficiently trained scholars can produce a document upon which all peo-
ple should attempt to build their eternal happiness. He points to Luther’s
rejection of the Epistle of James as one of many contradictions that should
discourage us from adopting any particular scholar’s conclusions about the
inspiration of the scriptures.
Since scholars often disagree about which portions of the Bible are
inspired, Climacus suggests that we imagine that “there has been a suc-
cessful demonstration of whatever any theological scholar in his happiest
moment could ever have wished to demonstrate about the Bible” (28). This
imagined study concludes that every letter of every word in all of the books
is inspired and that there are no contradictions anywhere in the collection.
He asks if this finding would bring the nonbeliever any closer to authentic
Christian faith. Climacus determines that it would not. Nor would such a
confirmation increase the faith of the believer (29). In an additional
DENYINGOBJECTIVITYTOARRIVEATCHRISTIANITY 51
thought experiment he asks us to imagine that the Bible is completely
defrauded. He concludes that neither the believer nor the nonbeliever
would be affected (30).
Through his discussion of the philologist and the two thought exper-
iments regarding the Bible, Climacus establishes that objective historical
inquiry cannot judge the inspiration of the scriptures. Studies of religious
texts that purport to determine inspiration really only gauge historical accu-
racy and consistency with other records because there is no external measure
of divinity. Objective historical inquiry might reduce texts to comparable
components, but this is not yet helpful. Similar to Climacus, we can
supposethat after dissecting the Book of Mormon we find that it has many
similarities to the Bible, that records from the same period tell the same
stories, and that all historic references are accurate. What does this tell us
about the inspiration of Mormonism? Such a study establishes historical
consistency, but it falls short of inspiration. Similarities do not necessarily
derive from the same source, and historical consistency does not discount
coincidence. Like Climacus, we find this experiment ineffective because
historical objectivity is insufficient for inspiration.
We conclude with Climacus that authentic Christian faith cannot be
based upon objective historical inquiry because the process cannot con-
firm the inspiration of the holy scriptures. It seems that at the most basic
level, historical inquiry lacks the tools necessary to determine divinity. At
best, such inquiry only produces approximation, a weak foundation for an
eternal happiness (30). Scholarly attempts to correct biblical history or to
retranslate and reorganize biblical texts tend to be very bold in contradict-
ing one another and arrogant in declaring their revised versions to be the
proper document on which one is to build an eternal happiness. Such
squabbling demonstrates why there can be no confidence in objective his-
torical inquiry. If believers base their faith on objectivity, they will miss the
inspiration of the scriptures and will therefore forfeit any understanding of
Christianity and its paradox, which Climacus believes can only come from
the holy scriptures.
Climacus makes a strong argument that objective historical inquiry
can never make absolute determinations about inspiration. Given the fre-
quent contradiction in historical inquiry, it seems the method often arrives
only at best guesses. Like Climacus, certainly we would find it reckless to
build our eternal happiness on approximations. The essential decision
52 STEVENA. SNELL
must be more subjective (32). The two hypothetical scenarios that he drew
during his discussion of scripture embrace this subjectivity. The moral is
that our acceptance or rejection of scripture is independent of objective
certainty. To be sure, it is convenient when historical inquiry confirms
religious belief. Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints love to find chiasmus in the Book of Mormon and artifacts of
ancient civilizations in Central America. Even still, Latter-day Saints tend
not to worry when scholars call Book of Mormon geography into doubt or
when scientists question the lineage of Native Americans. Faith in scrip-
ture persists despite objectivity because faith is inward and passionate.
This idea is consistent with Climacus, who said, “Objectively there is no
truth; an objective knowledge about the truth or the truths of Christianity
is precisely untruth” (224).
Critics might contend that the first premise of the inspiration argu-
ment is simply not true. They could reason that an omnipotent God does
not need written scripture to instruct His children: He could teach peo-
ple individually instead. Such an argument would raise issues about the
character and workings of God, two issues that would open lengthy lines
of debate. Instead of challenging these theological points, we should per-
mit that God may not need a written canon to relay His will. We can still
show that this criticism of the first premise fails to discredit the inspira-
tion argument because we can easily extend the umbrella of scripture to
include personal revelation. This adjustment seems consistent with
Doctrine and Covenants 68:4, which says, “Whatsoever they shall speak
when moved upon by the Holy Spirit shall be scripture.” When we allow
personal and continuing revelation from God to contribute to holy scrip-
ture, we actually strengthen the inspiration argument because there is no
conceivable way to establish the authenticity of personal revelation through
an objective historical inquiry. How can one objectively examine personal
experience with God? The conclusion is the same: authentic Christian
faith cannot be based upon objective historical inquiry.
In his development and employment of the passion-venture and
inspiration arguments, Climacus logically demonstrates that objectivity is
not only irrelevant, but an actual barrier to true Christianity. If people are
to truly seek after Jesus Christ and pursue His eternal happiness, they
DENYINGOBJECTIVITYTOARRIVEATCHRISTIANITY 53
must first learn to love subjectivity—to reach out for that which they can
only know on a personal level. Personal revelation must overrule external
validity. Only through such subjectivity can believers have authentic faith
and only through this quality of faith in Christ can they be saved. Perhaps
the most valuable lesson from this first portion of the Postscriptis that one
cannot become a Christian through a route that the world finds attractive.
Just the opposite, to become a Christian is to dedicate oneself absolutely to
the subjective truths that the world naively calls madness.
Works Cited
Holy Bible. Authorized (King James) Version. Salt Lake: The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979.
Kierkegaard, Søren. Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments.
Trans. Howard and Edna Hong. Princeton UP, 1992.
The Book of Mormon. Salt Lake: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, 1981.
The Doctrine and Covenants. Salt Lake: The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, 1981.