Aporia Vol. 9, 1999
The Necessity of Moral Virtue in the
Good Life
Ned Snow
In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle explicates the importance of
both moral and intellectual virtues in man's pursuit of happiness. In
Books 11 through V, he emphasizes the significance of moral virtue
in living the good life, while in Book X, he asserts that intellectual
virtue is superior to moral virtue; it is only through intellectual virtue
that man can attain supreme happiness. Aristotle's notion that intellec
tual virtue is superior to moral virtue leads many scholars to question
whether moral virtue is even necessary to realize happiness. 1 will
examine the necessity of moral virtue in Aristotle's notion of the good
life; specifically, 1 will explore both the inclusive and dominant views of
happiness to determine how Aristotle would regard the need for moral
virtue in acquiring ultimate happiness.
Some scholars assert that Aristotle believes the good life, or happi
ness, to be an inclusive end. That is, happiness includes both virtues
that Aristotle defines; intellectual virtue and moral virtue are two distinct
necessary constituents of true happiness. Such a view has two different
interpretations. The first inclusive interpretation is that happiness is a
comprehensive good. J. L. Ackrill subscribes to this notion, namely that,
as a comprehensive good, happiness includes all possible goods. His
interpretation is congruent with the latter portion of Aristotle's happiness
definition. The definition reads: "Happiness turns out to be activity of
soul in accordance with virtue, and if there are more than one virtue, in
accordance with the best and most perfect [teleion]" (1098a 16-17). In
Ned Snow is a junior at Brigham Young University majoring in philosophy and
economics. This essay was awarded first place in the 1999 David H. Yam
Philosophical Essay Competition.
22 NED SNOW
this definition, we understand the Greek word teleion to mean perfect,
where perfect can have two separate connotations, either/xnal or complete.
Ackrill interprets perfect as meaning complete in this instance. As a
result, the definition implies that happiness consists of an activity in
accordance with the best and most complete virtue, or the virtue con
taining the maximum amount of virtuous activities. We could also say
that if more than one virtue exists, then the activity must be in harmony
with all of them. Ackrill bases this interpretation on Aristotle's definition
of happiness in his Eudemian Ethics:
Since we saw that happiness is something complete [teleion], and
life is either complete or incomplete, and so also is virtue—one
being whole virtue, another a part—and the activity of what is
incomplete is itself incomplete, happiness must be that activity of
a complete life in accordance with complete virtue. (1219a 35-39)
Here, as a result of Aristotle's reference to whole and part, we can
understand his definition of perfect virtue to mean complete virtue,
consisting of all virtues (Ackrill 352). Consequently, if Aristotle
remains consistent in his definition of perfect virtue in both Eudemian
Ethics and Nicomachean Ethics, it would seem that his definition of
happiness implies that the soul's activity must be in harmony with all
vittues, thus supporting a comprehensive end.
Ackrill continues to argue for the comprehensive view of happiness
by examining Aristotle's first sentence of Book I, chapter 2. The passage
reads:
If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire for
its own sake (everything else being desired for the sake of this), and
if we do not choose everything for the sake of something else (for
at that rate the process would go on to infinity, so that our desire
would be empty and vain), clearly this must be the good and the
chief good.( 1094a 19-21)
Ackrill asserts that in this passage Aristotle gives a fallacious proof for
the chief good. For if some end exists which is desired for its own sake,
and if there is not an infinite regress of choosing, it does not necessarily
follow that this end is the chief good, that which is desired above all
THE NECESSITY OF MORAL VIRTUE IN THE GOOD LIFE 23
Other goods (Ackrill 350). Under the conditions that Aristotle sets
forth, it could be the case that more than one end exists which man
chooses for its own sake, these ends chosen independent of each other.
For example, man could choose to act in a morally virtuous and intel
lectually virtuous way, both for their own sakes, yet which end would
then be the chief good? Thus, when Aristotle refers to "some end" in
the first condition, he does not qualify this as being one particular end,
which does not allow for only one possible chief good (351). Ackrill
contends that this inconsistency in Aristotle's assertion would not exist
if we assume the premise that an end which is composed of two separate
ends, both chosen for their own sakes, is more perfect than either of
these two separate ends apart from the other. With this assumption,
separate ends can exist that are both chosen for their own sakes, while
a more perfect good can also exist which is composed of the separate
ends (351). The chief good then could only be one possible end and as
such would include all other possible goods. Hence, not only would this
missing link validate Aristotle's argument, hut it also would show that
Aristotle subscribes to an inclusive comprehensive view of happiness.
A further argument for the comprehensive view of happiness lies
in Aristotle's description of self-sufficiency. Both J. L. Ackrill and John
Cooper believe the self-sufficiency description supports the notion of a
comprehensive good. Aristotle's description of a good that is self-sufficient
translates as follows: "We think [happiness] most choice-worthy of all
things, without being counted along with other things—but if so counted
clearly made more choice-worthy by the addition of even the least of
goods"( 1097b 1^20).
Ackrill and Cooper believe that this passage refers to happiness as
an end which is unable to be counted among other goods, for it
already possesses all possible goods which could be added to it.
However, if it could possibly be counted among other goods, which
is impossible to actually encounter, it then would be more desirable
by adding any good to it. Therefore, happiness must be a compre
hensive good since it possesses all possible goods (Kenny 24).
Anthony Kenny also addresses the notion that this passage treats
happiness as a comprehensive end. However, he interprets the excerpt
from the above passage, "without being counted along with other
24 NED SNOW
things," to mean that happiness, if it were not to be counted along
with other goods, would still be most choice-worthy. Furthermore, the
succeeding statement, "but if so counted," would then mean that in
the event that happiness is so counted along with another good, as it
very well may be, it would be made more choice-worthy (Kenny 24).
This interpretation treats the excerpt, "without being counted along
with other things," as an explanation of how happiness might exist,
rather than a condition for happiness to exist. That is, not being able
to count happiness among other goods is not a condition for happi
ness to exist, but is instead an explanation of a case where happiness
may exist (25). Although Kenny does not prove his interpretation of
the self-sufficiency passage here, he does give an alternative view to the
comprehensive interpretation. It allows him to assert that the notion that
happiness includes every possible good is not necessarily tme. For if his
interpretation is correct, happiness could not possibly include every other
good, as it would be capable of having a separate good added to itself( 24).
In other words, if happiness could possibly be counted among other
goods that in turn would increase happiness' desirability when these
goods are added to it, then happiness could not include these goods. (If,
on the other hand, happiness included all possible goods, we could not
add a good which it already contains to increase its desirability.)
Upon establishing that an alternative interpretation may be pos
sible, Kenny evaluates the notion of happiness as a comprehensive good.
From a practical viewpoint, the notion of a comprehensive good seems
inconceivable. To say that a good is comprehensive would mean that
man must perform every conceivable moral and intellectual end to
realize the chief good. Yet what man exists that has performed every pos
sible end of moral and intellectual virtue? It is therefore evident that
the comprehensive view of happiness would lead one to believe that the
good life is not possible for one man to realize (Kenny 27-28). Instead,
it would seem that happiness as a comprehensive end is the sum of each
individual's happiness. However, this does not conform to the definition
of happiness that Aristotle describes. As a practical philosopher, Aristotle
describes happiness as attainable for an individual man, not for society
as a whole.
Because of the impracticality of happiness as a comprehensive end,
I will examine the second inclusive interpretation, that happiness is an
inclusive, non-comprehensive end. This notion seems more plausible
THE NECESSITY OF MORAL VIRTUE IN THE GOOL:) LIFE 25
since it allows for moral virtue to be a part of happiness but does not
require every single moral end to be present (Kenny 27). In support of
this view, we can observe that, although Aristotle explicitly states the
necessity of optimizing intellectual virtue (1177h 33-34), he never
claims that man must optimize moral virtue. The absence of an optimized
moral virtue shows that not every moral end must he performed to real
ize ultimate happiness (Cooper 167). Thus, at the same time that man
possesses a portion of moral virtue, he must optimize his intellectual
virtue in order to realize his greatest potential for happiness. It follows
that this non-comprehensive view emphasizes the superiority distinction
that Aristotle draws between intellectual and moral virtue. Just as
Aristotle defines intellectual virtue as the key to realizing man's greatest
happiness in Book X, this view also defines intellectual virtue as the
primary optimized constituent while moral virtue is simply a secondary
constituent.
It is necessary to understand that this non-comprehensive, inclusive
view does not treat moral virtue as a mere condition for happiness.
Throughout his Eudemian Ethics, moral virtue is an essential ingredient
of happiness. Aristotle seems to support this inclusive notion that a
"mixed life" of both intellectual and moral virtue is the flourishing life.
In that account, he refers to the good life as a life consisting of both
virtues, rather than a life restricted to one single virtue (Cooper 167).
Similarly, in the Nicomachean Ethics he explicitly outlines the necessity
of moral virtue in obtaining the greater end, intellectual virtue, that
allows man to realize the good life:
It is not possible to be good in the strict sense without practical
wisdom, nor practically wise without moral virtue (1144b 30-32).
Again [moral virtue] is not supreme over philosophic wisdom . . .
for [moral virtue] does not use [philosophic wisdom] but provides
for [philosophic wisdom's] coming into being. (1145a 7-9)
Accordingly, happiness must consist of both moral virtue and intellectual
virtue, moral virtue providing a foundation for intellectual virtue's
existence. It would appear, then, that the richer mixed life of both
virtues produces the perfect happiness which Aristotle refers to in Book
X (II 78h 8-9), while the solitary life of pure moral virtue produces only
secondary happiness (1178a 8-9).
26 NED SNOW
Timothy Roche also gives a compelling argument for the inclusive
view of happiness based upon the definition of man's function. When
Aristotle defines the function of man to be an activity of soul in
accordance with reason, he does not specify the activity to be the
highest intellectual activity, that of theoretical contemplation (1098a
12-13). Subsequently, human good is the function of man in accordance
with the best and most perfect [teleion] virtue (1098a 16-17). If Aristotle
believes that intellectual virtue is the sole constituent of human good,
he would simply define the function of man to be theoretical reason, and
human good to consist of the function of man in accordance with virtue.
Yet he does not define it this way. Aristotle precisely states that the
greatest good is the function of man in accordance with the best and
most perfect virtue (Roche 183). From this it follows that in this
instance perfect would seem to denote complete rather than final. For if
we instead assumed that perfect virtue meant final virtue, man's function
would have to be an activity in accordance with the most final virtue,
intellectual virtue, which would indicate that this activity must be
theoretical wisdom. Yet as previously stated, Atistotle does not define
man's function as theoretical activity in accordance with reason. It is
simply any activity in accordance with reason. Thus, we must assume
that in the definition of human good, Aristotle does not tefer to man
petforming his function in accordance with the most final virtue, but
rather the most complete virtue. Therefore, in agreement with Ackrill,
Roche maintains that Atistotle uses teleion to mean complete, thereby
giving an inclusive interpretation of the definition of happiness: the
function of man in accordance with the virtue that contains the most
goods, the most complete virtue. Once again we conclude that as the
highest virtue, intellectual virtue contains more than the one single end
of theotetical wisdom. Rather, it is a combination of theoretical wisdom
and separate moral ends which in turn form the chief good.
While it appears that the non-comprehensive, inclusive view of
happiness must be what Aristotle assetts in his definition of the good
life, John Cooper introduces a theory that is in harmony with the inclusive
view's assertions, but at tbe same time draws a subtle distinction
which affirms the dominant position. He maintains that the mixed life
which Aristotle declates to be the good life in the Eudemian Ethics is
nothing more than the life of moral virtue, the best possible human good
(Cooper 166-67). Likewise, when Aristotle speaks of the necessity of
THE NECESSITY OF MORAL VIRTUE IN THE GOOD LIFE 27
moral virtue to gain intellectual virtue and subsequently live the good
life, he simply speaks of the human good life. Furthermore, towards the
end of Book I, Aristotle asserts that human virtue leads to human hap
piness. Although the life of human virtue is thought to mean the life of
moral virtue, it is not plausible to say that human virtue consists only
of moral virtue, excluding intellectual virtue. Similarly, human happiness
should not exclude the happiness that man experiences from intellectual
virtue (Cooper 166). This theory would support Aristotle's definition of
the function of man. Man realizes human good not only through
functioning in accordance with moral virtue, hut also through exer
cising his rational intellect. Just as Roche maintains that the function
of man should not exclude moral virtue. Cooper asserts that it should
not exclude intellectual virtue with regard to human good. Thus, the
preceding arguments for happiness as an inclusive end are correct hut
only when we consider them for the human good life. On the other
hand, the life of intellectual virtue does not consist of experiencing the
human good life. It is associated with the divine element within man
and is therefore associated with the divine good life, ultimate happiness.
We are to regard ultimate happiness as something completely separate
from mere human happiness (178-89).
Cooper's assertion introduces the dominant view that ultimate hap
piness consists in exercising intellectual virtue exclusively, independent of
moral virtue. The dominant position seems to fit better with Aristotle's
assertion in Book X than does the inclusive position. Here, Aristotle
clearly refers to theoretical wisdom as the greatest activity for man
rather than the moral activity of practical reasoning. In chapter 7, he
states that to achieve the greatest happiness, man must engage in an
activity which is in accordance with the highest virtue. Such a virtue
would reflect the closest element of the divine within man, and as such
would yield supreme happiness. Aristotle identifies this highest virtue as
intellectual virtue on the basis that the greatest human activity possible
is contemplation, or theoretical reason. This is so because intellectual
virtue governs the activity that man has in common with the gods,
contemplation.
In this sense, we do not view moral virtue as unsuitable for a man
who possesses ultimate happiness. Rather, people who experience ultimate
happiness may possibly engage in morally virtuous activities merely
because other people surround them. They cannot escape their earthly
28 NED SNOW
surroundings and consequently they practice moral virtue simply
because of their locale. However, they do not engage in moral virtue for
the sake of practicing moral virtue. Just as Aristotle maintains that the gods
do not practice moral virtue because they have no need for any external
means, so also men who experience divine ultimate happiness have no
need to practice moral virtue. Moral virtue, then, is merely a result of liv
ing in a human environment (Cooper 164-65). It is not a constituent of
ultimate happiness. This dominant position does not contradict
Aristotle's previous statement that moral virtue is necessary for the
development of intellectual virtue. Such a development leads to the richer,
mixed life that Aristotle would call complete human happiness, yet dis
tinct from ultimate divine happiness.
W. F. Hardie extends the notion that man does not require moral
virtue to experience ultimate happiness. He contends that the dominant
intellectual view allows for man to be immoral in his quest for contemp
lative activities. Furthermore, moral altruism and a dominant end seem
to contradict each other according to Aristotle's definition of happiness.
The definition states that man must function in accordance with virtue
in a complete life if he is to realize the ultimate end. In other words, one
day of contemplation will not produce automatic ultimate happiness.
Contemplation is a life-long activity whereby man realizes his ultimate
end. To illustrate how moral virtue contradicts this principle, Hardie
cites the example of a man sacrificing his life for another in war. This
action obviously exercises moral virtue, yet because it immediately
ends the man's life, he is unable to realize his full potential for obtain
ing intellectual virtue. His shortened life deprives him of a complete
life, thereby depriving him of ultimate happiness. Thus, to reach the
highest end, divine happiness, man must selfishly place his contem
plative activities above all other ends included in moral virtue
(Hardie 293).
This assertion does not seem plausible in Aristotle's view of
moral virtue and the good life. After he extensively outlines the value
of moral virtue in Books II through V, it does not seem sensible for
Aristotle to not only give up the idea of the necessity of moral virtue,
but also to permit the practice of immoral actions in order to obtain a
greater good. While Aristotle does describe the development of both
virtues through different means, he never claims that obtaining one
virtue inhibits the development of another. Consequently, it is plausible
THE NECESSITY OF MORAL VIRTUE IN THE GOOD LIFE 29
to think that he extensively elaborates on moral virtue simply because
the higher end of pure intellectual virtue is not attainable for most men.
Likewise, he could elaborate on moral virtue because human happiness
is separate and distinct from divine happiness. But once again, no matter
how distinct the two virtues are, Aristotle never implies that they inter
fere with each other. Hence, the extreme dominant view of Hardie does
not seem permissible in Aristotle's ethical system.
Cooper's view on the dominant end of happiness answers Hardie's
challenge that ultimate happiness allows for immoral actions. Because
the highest intellectual function is independent of human actions, it
does not depend upon sense perceptions of the body. Conversely, moral
and immoral actions do depend upon the body. It follows that contempla
tion is not subject to moral or immoral actions. As a result, in ultimate
happiness, man practices neither moral virtue nor vice; he simply
contemplates. Similarly, just as in the De Anima when Aristotle dis
tinguishes the difference between the highest intellectual powers and
the other psychological and biological behaviors, in the Nicomachean
Ethics he makes the same distinction between intellectual virtue and moral
virtue (Cooper 175). He maintains that while psychological and biolog
ical behaviors are connected to the body, the highest intellectual power
is not connected in any way (De Anima 413b 25-32). From this, we can
infer that moral virtue corresponds to the body while pure intellectual
virtue exists separately and independently, corresponding to the soul
(Cooper 175). Subsequently, as mentioned previously, a man possessing
ultimate happiness who appears to exercise moral virtue only performs
these actions because he has a physical existence where people surround
him. However, just as the gods' happiness does not depend upon moral
actions (for they cannot exercise moral virtue), man's happiness does
not depend upon his moral actions.
Upon examining happiness as a dominant end, we see that moral
virtue is not a constituent of ultimate happiness and consequently,
ultimate happiness is not an inclusive end. However, moral virtue still
seems necessary before contemplation is possible, due to man's mortal
existence. Because ultimate happiness is synonymous with godly
happiness, we can think of man's ultimate happiness as an archetype of
a god's life. However, man is not a god. The gods are able to attain ultimate
happiness merely through contemplation only because they exist in an
eternal realm where moral practice is not possible. In Book X, Aristotle
30 NED SNOW
explains this notion that because moral virtue requires means whereby
one can practice moral activity, it necessitates external factors with
which one can interact. Yet as a perfect being, a god cannot need anything;
external factors are non-existent in a god's realization of happiness
(1178a 34-1178b 11). Thus, it is impossible for a god to practice moral
virtue. Conversely, man exists in a mortal realm where moral practice is
possible. From Aristotle's description of human good, it would seem that
so long as we are human, moral practice is not only possible, but neces
sary as well (Devereux 258). Thus, in our mortal state of being, it seems
natural that man must progress from human happiness to divine happiness.
Man cannot simply forego the life of moral virtue and arrive at divine
happiness through mere contemplation. Instead, man must first live the
morally virtuous life, which, as Cooper believes, must include the practice
of both moral and intellectual virtues. Following this human good life,
man can progress to a life in which his happiness is based solely upon
pure intellectual virtue. In this state of ultimate happiness, he still practices
moral virtue because of his mortal existence, yet his happiness is not
based upon that practice.
This assertion does not entail that ultimate happiness includes
moral virtue. Rather, it defines moral virtue as a necessary condition to
reach ultimate happiness. In other words, ultimate happiness consists of
the dominant end of intellectual virtue, yet also presupposes moral
virtue for man.
Aristotle appears to support this notion of a gradual progression
towards ultimate happiness when he speaks of developing good habits
before teaching. In Book II, he explains that man acquires moral virtue
through habit. It cannot be taught in an instructional sense, but rather,
man must leam it by practicing it. On the other hand, man acquires the
separate end of intellectual virtue not by habit, but through teaching. Its
origination and development depend upon teaching, independent of all
other actions. He does not show any relationship between these two
methods until Book X, chapter 9, when he states," argument and teach
ing, we may suspect, are not powerful with all men, but the soul of the
student must first have been cultivated by means of habits" (1179b
24-25). Before man participates in teaching, he must prepare his soul
through his habits. Although the soul is separate from the body, the
body still prepares the soul for experiences. That is, developing moral
virtue must occur before the single constituent of ultimate happiness.
THE NECESSITY OF MORAL VIRTUE IN THE GOOD LIFE 31
pure intellectual virtue, is possible. Hence, the acquisition of pure intel
lectual virtue seems to rely upon the condition of moral virtue.
Thus, ultimate happiness is not an inclusive end; nor is it a domi
nant end that man can acquire as completely independent of moral
virtue. To obtain the life of ultimate happiness, man must first exercise
moral virtue before he can seek the separate dominant end of contem
plation.
32 NED SNOW
Works Cited
Ackrill, J. L. "Aristotle on Eudaimonia." Proceedings of the British
Academy 60 (1975): 339-59.
Cooper, John M. Reason and Human Good in Aristotle. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1975.
Devereux, Daniel T. "Aristotle on the Essence of Happiness." Studies in
Aristotle. Ed. Dominic J. O'Meara. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic
University Press, 1981. 247-60.
Hardie, W.E "The Final Good in Aristotle's Ethics." The Journal of the
Royal Institute of Philosophy. 40(1965): 111-95.
Kenny, Anthony. Aristotle on the Perfect Life. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1992.
Roche, Timothy D. "Ergon and Eudaimonia in Nicomachean Ethics I:
Reconsidering the Intellectualist Interpretation." Journal of the
History of Philosophy 26 (1988): 175-94-