Aporia vol. 17 no. 2—2007
Intensional States and Computer Programs
Joseph sousek
W e may define a computer program as a list of instructions which
determines some specific output response on reception of some spe-
cific input. The means by which this output is achieved is purely formal.
That is, both the input and output are symbols (for example, ones and
zeros) which have no intrinsic meaning, though they can be differentiated
from other symbols. A simple instruction is conceived here as a conditional
rule that can be applied unthinkingly.
This description of a computer program is to be distinguished from a
computer itself, which can be described as “the instantiation of a computer
program” (Searle, “Minds, Brains and Programs” 347). This distinction be-
tween a computer and a computer program is important to my argument
about John Searle’s proposition. Searle does not suggest that computers
have intensional states: surely those things we know to have intensional
states (ourselves) can be described generally in terms of various computer
programs. Rather, Searle argues that nothing can have intensional states
“solely by virtue of being a computer with the right sort of program”
(“Minds, Brains and Programs” 347).
“Intensional states,” “meaning,” and “understanding” will be taken
here to mean a conscious understanding of what given symbols represent.
While the symbols, in Searle’s terminology, are merely syntactical, the mean-
ing, intension, or understanding of what a symbol represents is semantic.
Where this meaning comes from and what determines each symbol’s spe-
cific meaning is something I will return to later in this essay.
Searle’s position can be stated as follows:
1) Computer programs are syntactic, dealing only with
the manipulation of intrinsically meaningless symbols.
Joseph Sousek is an undergraduate at Bristol University, majoring in philosophy.
This essay was written while on exchange to the National University of Singapore.
22 Joseph sousek
2) Human minds have mental content; they have
semantics.
3) Anything that is purely syntactic is not sufficient
for semantics.
4) Computer programs are not sufficient for se-
mantics; they do not have mental content.
Premise one is true by definition. Premise two has been questioned by phi-
losophers such as Quine in Word and Object, but Searle takes premise two
as self-evident even in the face of other philosophers’ arguments. In fact, he
sees the conclusion that we do not mean things by our words as a reductio ad
absurdum of Quine’s whole project, and I will accept this conclusion provi-
sionally (“Indeterminacy, Empiricism, and the First Person” 137). All that
is now required in order to derive the conclusion that computer programs
alone cannot give rise to intensional states is the third premise, and this is
the thesis of Searle’s famous thought experiment, the Chinese room. Searle
asks us to imagine a situation where a system runs a computer program that
simulates the understanding of a foreign language, and he tries to show
that such a system cannot rightly be said to experience intensional states or
to understand any meaning in its operation.
The situation is as follows: A monolingual English-speaking man is
locked in a room containing a large selection of Chinese symbols and a pic-
torial rulebook. Now and then a symbol is posted into the room through a
slot in the wall. For every symbol or combination of symbols coming into
the room, the rulebook provides simple instructions for determining a sym-
bol or combination of symbols to post out of the room through a second
slot. These instructions are entirely formal, giving no hint of the translated
meaning of any of the symbols. Unknown to the man, the people outside
the room are asking coherent questions in Chinese script, and the rulebook
constitutes a program that provides coherent and informative responses to
these questions, ones “indistinguishable from those of a native Chinese
speaker” (Searle, Minds, Brains and Science 32).
To a Chinese-speaking observer, then, whatever is inside the room
seems to understand Chinese and to mean things by its responses. How-
ever, says Searle, all the man is doing is following simple rules for the
manipulation of what are to him meaningless images: “there is no way
you could learn any Chinese simply by manipulating these formal sym-
bols” (Minds, Brains and Science 32). The man inside does not understand
the inputs or outputs and certainly does not assign the real Chinese
meaning to the output symbols. The conclusion Searle draws from this
IntensIonal states and Computer programs 23
scenario is that the systematic manipulation of syntax is not sufficient
for semantics. Therefore, the instantiation of a computer program alone
is not sufficient to constitute mental content (meaning, understanding,
intension, etc.).
Searle expresses some bewilderment with both the resistance to his
argument and the persistence of the proponents of this resistance (“Is the
Brain’s Mind a Computer Program?” 270). Those who resist Searle’s argu-
ment give objections that aim at finding an interpretation or stipulation
of the Chinese room scenario where the system (the instantiation of the
computer program) really does have the mental states that Searle denies it has.
Although Searle has provided responses to many of these objections, I think
two of them have proven particularly difficult to dispel adequately. For rea-
sons I will outline in this paper, these objections seem to cast a considerable
degree of doubt on Searle’s conclusion. After evaluating the threat posed to
Searle’s position, I will examine whether there is any conclusive way to counter
this threat or whether Searle’s thesis must be rejected or at least suspended.
The systems reply makes the claim that, while it is certainly true that
the man in the Chinese room does not understand Chinese, the system as
a whole does. The system as a whole includes everything in the room: the
man himself, the rulebook, the Chinese symbols, the input and output slots,
and so on. Only a system that includes all of these elements is truly analo-
gous to an instantiation of a computer program and to a human brain. This
system altogether can converse in Chinese perfectly meaningfully.
Searle’s response to this reply is twofold. First, he asserts that it is
simply implausible to think that “somehow the conjunction of that person
and some bits of paper might understand Chinese” (“Minds, Brains and
Programs” 337). In fact, Searle says he feels “somewhat embarrassed” to
be taking it seriously. Searle’s response is unsatisfactory because it comes
from the assumption that a system that is supposed to be analogous to a
conventional computer cannot have intensional states, and this is the very
claim that he set out to prove. It begs the question.
Second, Searle gives a more reasoned argument, asking us to imagine
another situation in which the man takes the time to memorize the entire
(untranslated) rulebook and all the symbols, doing the whole process from
memory. In such a case the man is the whole system, and he still has no
idea what any of the symbols mean. He still does not understand Chinese.
If people claim he does, they are clearly using a very different conception of
understanding from the one we are concerned with. The conception we are
interested in is the sort of understanding that the same man has of English.
We would not imagine that the man converses in Chinese with the same
sort of semantic understanding as he has when he converses in English.
His understanding of Chinese is limited to the reception and response of
24 Joseph sousek
symbols to which he ascribes no meaning. So even in this case, the system
cannot be said to have the relevant understanding.
However, there are problems with this response. First, it might be
argued that the example is now implausible—not in the sense that the ex-
ample is logically impossible, for it seems not to be, nor in the sense that
the practical impossibility of trying out the experiment is a problem, for
this probably applies equally to the original Chinese room scenario. The
problem is that we have reached so “deep into counterfactual territory”
(Lowe 217) that it is impossible to convincingly forecast the consequences
of such a scenario. If a person were able to memorize a rulebook enabling
him to answer any question in the Chinese language sufficiently well to
feign understanding, “who is to say whether or not he would as a conse-
quence be able to understand Chinese?” (Lowe 217). I would be inclined
to side with Searle in saying that understanding could no more arise from
this scenario than from the standard Chinese room scenario, but the
certainty of the conclusion that is present in the original argument has
diminished here.
Second, and more importantly, one of the strengths of the Chinese
room as originally conceived is that, when looked at in isolation, the man
himself clearly did not understand Chinese. Rather, he relied on following
instructions physically external to himself. Whether the man could under-
stand Chinese in the same sense he understands English was a criterion
for whether the system had any intensional states. If, however, all aspects
of the system are internalized in the man, or if we are required to look for
semantics in the Chinese room as a whole system, then we can no longer
look at a distinct element of the system which clearly does or does not
understand and whose lack of understanding constitutes an absence of
semantics. If we must examine the entire system of the Chinese room, or
one person who embodies the entire system, then it will of course always
appear to understand Chinese, and the only reason we have to deny this
conclusion is the pre-experimental, though plausible, intuition that some-
thing which merely manipulates syntax does not grasp any semantics. Once
again, Searle is begging the question, using the conclusion of his argument
as a premise. The absence of a distinct criterion for the system’s having
intensional states forces him to resort at least in part to reliance on the very
principle he set out to prove.
The second objection I will discuss is the brain-simulator reply. This
reply states that if the system on which the computer program was run
simulated the way a human brain works, then the system would have in-
tensional states. That is, it would have intensional states if it “simulated
the actual sequence of neuron firings at the synapses of the brain of a na-
tive Chinese speaker when he understands stories in Chinese and gives
IntensIonal states and Computer programs 25
answers to them” (Searle, “Minds, Brains and Programs” 341). Searle gives
two counterexamples to this objection.
The first counterexample is of the man in the room manipulating
an intricate complex of water pipes and valves that match the layout of
a Chinese speaker’s brain. The Chinese symbols correspond to English
instructions in the rulebook for which valves to turn on or off in order to
produce the output symbol. He then claims that the described system does
not produce understanding any more than the standard Chinese room
does: “As long as it simulates only the formal structure of the sequence of
neuron firings at the synapses, it won’t have simulated what matters about
the brain: its ability to produce intensional states” (Searle, “Minds, Brains
and Programs” 341).
The second counterexample, produced against Paul Churchland’s
objections, invokes the case of a large gym full of monolingual English-
speakers who play the role of synapses and nodes in a Chinese-speaking
brain, resulting in matching output to input symbols as before. Again, Searle
claims that the lack of any understanding of Chinese existing anywhere in
the room shows that the brain-simulation has failed.
Searle’s defence can be criticized because it seems to take the idea of
brain-form simulation a little too literally. The assertion that water pipes
in the shape of a brain could never be enough to constitute understanding
fails to engage with the point at issue. Since Searle offers little explanation
of what it is about the brain that ‘“produces intensional states,” (though
he does elsewhere concede that a non-biological system could be capable of
intensional states so long as it had “the relevant causal capacities equivalent
to those of brains” [“Is the Brain’s Mind a Computer Program?” 269]) one
is led to understand that, in Searle’s opinion, a system that is sufficiently
similar in the right respects, whatever these are, might be capable of un-
derstanding. The right respects might be to do with formal structure, the
means by which information is passed, the speed at which it is transferred,
and so on. If, for example, the system running the program comprised not
water pipes but a hugely complicated network of wires carrying electronic
impulses in the layout of a Chinese speaker’s brain, it might be deemed suf-
ficiently similar to a brain to produce understanding. As in the case where
a man internalizes the rule book in the systems reply, who is to say whether
the system would have intensional states?
Again, Searle’s response is subject to the serious flaw that it loses
its criterion of the presence of intensional states since here they would
take place in the simulated brain which, whether it meant anything or not,
would of course always appear to. Searle is forced once again to call on our
intuition that syntax alone is not sufficient for semantics in order to con-
clude that the brain has no semantics.
26 Joseph sousek
These two objections cast significant doubt on the certainty of Searle’s
conclusion, and his responses to both of them have not been decisive,
resorting to the preconception that syntax is insufficient for semantics.
One’s position on the issue seems to depend simply on whether one finds
Searle’s conclusion intuitively plausible (as I must admit I do). In this con-
text it seems unsurprising that the issue has lingered in stalemate. If we
are to show that Searle is right—that instantiations of computer programs
alone do not have intensional states—then some effort should be made to
produce more effective arguments.
Implicit throughout the foregoing discussion is the idea that for a
computer to mean something, to understand, or to have intensional states,
it is necessary that the symbols involved represent something, refer to some-
thing, or at least connote other things. Obviously, for us to mean something
by a word or symbol, the word or symbol must represent or refer to some-
thing other than itself. This principle implies that whenever the idea that
a computer has intensional states is postulated, it is because the computer
appears to understand inputs and produce outputs that use syntactic sym-
bols to represent or refer to things beyond the symbols themselves. Thus,
something that inputs and outputs symbols that have no representation or
reference would certainly not be said to mean anything by the symbols.
In the case I have been discussing, the instantiation of a computer
program tends to provide evidence that it understands Chinese and can
converse in Chinese fluently and meaningfully. This proficiency in Chinese
seems genuine because a Chinese observer will see that when the system is
asked a question in symbols that represent some idea, it will respond with
an answer in symbols that represent a related idea. So when given symbols
meaning “how old are you?” rather than responding with some unrelated
symbols, it responds with “I am thirty-seven.” Such coherent answers are
the reason for claiming that the system understands Chinese. Its syntactic
answers represent something semantically, something coherent and appro-
priate to the semantics of the question.
Suppose we were to design another room similar to the Chinese
room and put a man in that room. Instead of containing a large selection
of Chinese symbols and a Chinese pictorial rulebook, this room contains
an equally extensive selection of different Rorschach-style inkblot images.
It also contains a Rorschach-style pictorial rulebook for matching input im-
ages to output images, and from time to time an image or combination of
images are posted in the room through a slot, prompting the appropriate
output to be posted back out. I will call this room the “Rorschach room.”
Suppose we run this computer program and find that all is in order.
The man in the room quite competently finds the correct output for every
input, and the result is a steady flow of inkblot images coming out that
IntensIonal states and Computer programs 27
have some relation to the ones going in. However, the relation exists solely
because the output is entailed by the rulebook’s selection of the input.
What would outside observers, unaware of the nature of the system inside
the room, make of this? It seems obvious they would have to conclude one
of the following: 1) many images are going in and out of the room at ran-
dom; 2) the images are going in and coming out according to a system (not
a language) the people don’t know; 3) the images are questions and answers
in a language they do not know.
Because there is a consistent system in place, we can reject option
one. And because we know the images do not constitute the script of any
language (rather, they are non-representative symbols that we happen to
manipulate consistently with a computer program), we can eliminate op-
tion three. Thus, we are left with option two, which, because it does not
employ language, suggests that a computer program is not sufficient for in-
tensional states. However, so far, even accepting option two is unproblematic
for opponents of Searle. Someone who believes that the instantiation of a
computer program is sufficient for intensional states to occur can simply
say that the given scenario is not an appropriate computer program. An ap-
propriate computer program would have to recreate the use of a language,
but this one does not.
Having tried out this computer program, let us imagine that we take
the time to create an entirely new language which we will call Rorschach-
speak. When we come to designing the writing of this language we use the
previously mentioned inkblot images, and we carefully ensure that every
possible question of this language is represented by a symbol or sequence
of symbols in our previously designed computer program. We also ensure
that every output symbol or combination of output symbols is given an
appropriate corresponding meaning in relation to the meaning of every
input symbol or combination of input symbols. This process might sound
implausible, but even if it is rather complicated I see no reason why it
should be logically impossible. Furthermore, even if designing a complete
language in this way were far-fetched, it is not strictly necessary for this
thought experiment. Languages can undoubtedly have meaning even when
they are not holistic. There could be, for example, a unique language, the
scope of which is solely to talk about events that routinely take place on
a construction site. Presumably, in this case there is much less room for
inconsistencies to arise between the language and the rulebook.
We now teach an unsuspecting man this language until he has mas-
tered it and invite him to observe the Rorschach room from the outside. We
run the computer program, giving exactly the same input, receiving exactly
the same output as before. The participant will recognize the input as ques-
tions and the output as appropriate responses. On exactly the same basis
28 Joseph sousek
as the Chinese room case, we might have reason to say that the computer
program understands a language. However, in this case someone making
such a claim is faced with a dilemma. If the system means the Rorschach-
speak meanings by its outputs, either the system has always understood these
meanings of the symbols—even before we invented them—or it understands
them now solely in virtue of someone else’s understanding them.
The implications of either of these options will be very difficult to
accommodate. We clearly have no grounds to suppose that the system has
always had understanding of the syntax we gave it and somehow held each
symbol to have the same meaning as those we later defined ourselves. On
the other hand, to say that the system understands Rorschach-speak now
simply because there is another speaker present would compromise our
conception of what meaning is. Surely I would understand and mean things
by my words in English even if I were the last English speaker alive. Our
Rorschach-speaker’s understanding the symbols to represent something
does not entail that the source of the symbols means something by them.
Let us add another element to this story. Suppose we invent another
language. We will call this language Rorschach-talk. This language, despite
also using Rorschach-style inkblots as script, sounds completely different
from Rorschach-speak. Again, any input-output pair of symbols from the
original program will match up to a question-answer pair of sentences with
appropriate corresponding meanings, but each symbol will have a different
meaning in Rorschach-talk from what it has in Rorschach-speak. Making this
language might also sound implausible, but I think two languages could
share the same syntax. And they could do this while keeping a large range
of question-answer pairs coherent within each language but differing in
meaning between the two languages. As previously mentioned, it is certain-
ly possible if they are specialized, non-holistic languages, and this approach
would be adequate for our purposes.
The next step is to allow a different person to master Rorschach-talk
and to allow them to observe the Rorschach room from the outside. Run-
ning the exact inputs as before on the computer program, we will find that
the new observer recognizes the inputs and outputs as appropriate ques-
tions and answers, and we will have grounds to make the claim that the
system of the Rorschach room understands Rorschach-talk. Here Searle’s
opponents certainly have a problem: they now are faced with the prospect
that the system understands both languages at the same time. It experi-
ences intensional states about both the Rorschach-speak meaning and the
Rorschach-talk meaning of the syntactic answer that it gives in response to
any input.
We have as good a reason for saying that the Rorschach room under-
stands one or both of the languages as we had for saying that the Chinese
IntensIonal states and Computer programs 29
room understands Chinese. Surely to say that the room means two unre-
lated things by every symbol it outputs is absurd. Any attempt to argue that
the system understands only one of the languages will be entirely arbitrary.
There is no way to choose between them. On the other hand, if we concede
that the system can mean more than one unrelated thing at a time by a
symbol, what is to stop it from having other meanings?
As seen in the conclusions we began to draw from the previous sce-
nario, people who think the system has intensional states are committed
to the system’s either having always associated these intensional states with
the symbol or to the intensional states arising from other people who un-
derstand the meanings of the symbols. In the latter case, people who think
the system has intensional states would be committed to meaning’s being
dependent on having understanding listeners. They would be, therefore,
committed to thinking that any meaning ascribed to any of the symbols—by
any observer—is somehow also found in the system.
If I thought that one inkblot meant “what do you want to do today?”
and another meant “I think I’ll go to the mall,” then on this line of reason-
ing the system would also ascribe those meanings to the inkblots. We can
view this either as an a priori proof of telepathy or a reductio ad absurdum.
However, if we take the view that the system has always understood both
languages then the absurdity will be all the more dramatic, since it follows
that for any other meaning we might ascribe to each symbol in the future,
the system will always have meant these simultaneously. This means that
at any moment in time the system must mean every possible meaning by
each symbol it uses. It is in the nature of a symbol that it can stand for
more or less anything, and as a logical consequence, the system must mean
everything by every symbol it uses. One can hardly imagine something more
different from our conception of what it is to have intensional states.
It is not clear how anyone could argue that the Chinese room is sig-
nificantly different from this example. Certainly, there is only one lexicon
of the meanings of Chinese symbols, but it is clearly wrong to suggest that
a computer program that manipulates syntax has intensional states because
of popular understanding of the symbols we feed it. If it has intensions, the
Chinese room system could mean anything. There is no reason to believe
that the system actually means the Chinese meanings of each symbol. Thus,
systems that merely instantiate computer programs do not have semantics
or intensional states, at least not in the way we understand humans to have
semantics and intensional states. These systems only mean something by
their syntax either by an external observer’s ascribing meaning to it (which
hardly constitutes meaning on the part of the system) or by meaning ab-
solutely everything (which is both absurd and degrades the whole value of
having meaning; it fails to pick out a representation or referent).
30 Joseph sousek
Importantly, this conclusion is immune to the objections Searle
failed to refute conclusively. Where his justification for concluding that
syntax alone is not sufficient for semantics was ultimately dependent on his
prior assumption that semantics could not arise from the syntactic opera-
tions alone, my argument takes a different line. Regardless of whether we
look at the man in the room, or the room as a whole, or a brain-simulator,
as long as the systems simply manipulate syntax in accordance with given
instructions, the systems will either have no meaning or only have mean-
ing of the absurd kind that we encountered in the culmination of the
Rorschach room argument.
A concern for proponents of my position is that one may have no
justification for the belief that anyone other than oneself has intensional
states. The obvious reason for thinking that a computer program can mean
things is that, based on our understanding of the language it is manipulating,
it appears to. The same can be said of human beings. There is a possibility
of a sort of meaning solipsism here, and like all forms of solipsism, it is
very difficult to escape once explicitly entertained. Unlike a mere syntax
manipulator, humans display great versatility of interaction with their envi-
ronment in such a way that they can indicate what they mean by symbols or
words. There are all sorts of ways we could determine what a person means
by a symbol that would fail to derive any response from a syntax manipula-
tor.1 Equipping an instantiation of a computer program with the means to
behave in a humanlike manner (as in a further objection to Searle, the robot
reply) would do nothing to convince us that it has intensional states if at the
heart of things it is merely a Chinese room attached to very sophisticated
inputs and outputs, but equally we have no way of proving that other hu-
mans are anything more than functioning setups of this kind.
I think this can be overcome. I know I mean things by my words, and
I suspect other people do too. My reasons for thinking so are that I seem to
be the same kind of entity as everyone around me, functioning in the same
way. Furthermore, I know that other people are built of the same organic
stuff. In my case it seems to give rise to, or is at least in constant conjunction
with the appearance of consciousness, sensory data, and of course, mean-
ing, and it would take a truly sound argument to convince me that mine is
the only case of meaning. I have not come across such a positive argument.
But meaning and consciousness (and all the things caught up in solipsistic
considerations) are incredibly mysterious. We should not so lightly attri-
bute them to something as simple as a computer program, whatever the size
and efficiency of that program. Whatever it is that generates meaning, it is
1For example, broadly speaking, we would understand that “gavagai” had something to do with
rabbits even if we failed to identify the precise meaning.
IntensIonal states and Computer programs 31
not the manipulation of symbols, and consequently, so long as we maintain
a reasonable notion of what it is to mean something, we can be sure that
anything which merely manipulates symbols means nothing by them.
Works Cited
Jacquette, Dale. Philosophy of Mind. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1994.
Lowe, E. J. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. New York: Cambridge
UP, 2000.
Moody, Todd C. Philosophy and Artificial Intelligence. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1993.
Searle, John. Minds, Brains and Science. New York: Penguin Books, 1984.
———. “Indeterminacy, Empiricism, and the First Person.” The Journal of
Philosophy 84.3 (1987): 123–46.
———. “Is the Brain’s Mind a Computer Program?” Readings in Language and
Mind. Ed. Heimir Geirsson and Michael Losonsky. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers, 1996. 264–72.
———. “Minds, Brains and Programs.” Philosophy of Mind: Contemporary
Readings. Ed. Timothy O’Connor and David Robb. New York:
Routledge, 2003. 332–52.