New Page 1 Page 1 of 7
Plato Among and Against the Post-Modernists
Joseph Spencer
“One day I heard someone reading, as he said, from a book of Anaxagoras, and saying that it is Mind
[1]
that directs and is the cause of everything.” With moments to expire before Athens would execute
him, Plato’s Socrates was exploring the meaning of a few lines by another philosopher. To the last
minute of Socrates’ dramatic life, Plato has him making important criticism on vital literary texts.
Textual criticism is found throughout Plato’s works, making it his main philosophical methodology. His
literary approach destroys the image of Plato as a logician working systematically from proven axioms
or definitions toward a conclusion. In fact, Plato never makes a systematic exposition of just one
philosophical issue, nor moves from a stated central topic or thesis to work out the numerous details, as
Aristotle would do shortly thereafter. Plato’s selective, spontaneous, and unsystematic approach links
him with a much later tradition: post-modernism. The purposes of this paper are two: to establish that
Plato’s productive methodology was literary criticism; and to explore the implications of the post-
modern revival of Plato’s approach.
On the Elenchus: Its Negative Nature
In his fundamental work on what is Socrates’ and what is Plato’s thought, Gregory Vlastos put a
[2]
chronological order to Plato’s writing of the dialogues. According to him, the Theory of Forms,
considered the heart of Plato’s metaphysical ideas, appears seventeen dialogues into Plato’s career. But
[3]
the dialectic, which supposedly finds its logical grounding in the Theory of Forms, surfaces in Plato’s
very first dialogues. As the early dialogues express Socratic philosophy, their use of the elenchus
proves it to be Socrates’ method. Hence, it is the elenchus that leads Plato to the Forms, not the Forms
that lead Plato to the elenchus. Vlastos’ ordering of the dialogues demonstrates this point, establishing a
history of early questions and explorations that only eventually became philosophical theorizing and
propounding.
It has been strongly argued that the earliest dialogues do not belong to Plato’s thought, but that they
rather represent Socrates’ philosophies. Vlastos explains that, among other differences, “Socrates
M
[Socrates of the middle dialogues] had a grandiose metaphysical theory of ‘separately existing’ Forms,”
[4]
while “Socrates [Socrates of the early dialogues] has no such theory.” Essentially, the early
E
dialogues produce questions about particular moral or ethical doctrines. The heart of the Euthyphro, for
[5]
example, is Socrates’ question: “Tell me then, what is the pious, and what the impious, do you say?”
[6]
In the Laches, Socrates says, “Then let us undertake first of all, Laches, to state what courage is.” In
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 2 of 7
the Charmides, Socrates tells the young man, “Well, to help us decide whether it resides in you or not,
[7]
say what, in your opinion, temperance is.” The early dialogues are unique in the history of
philosophy, however, for answers are never forthcoming. Though Socrates continually asks questions,
he never arrives at anything but aporia, confusion. The endless quest becomes perfectly frustrating
[8]
when Socrates ultimately avows in the Apology that he is “conscious of knowing practically nothing,”
thereby claiming no authority in ethics. This profound ignorance creates a famous paradox, because
[9]
Socrates feels secure enough to claim sure knowledge about “the God.” This paradox, that the
elenchus does and does not provide knowledge, is what seems to have ironically filled Plato with the
desire to seek truth, as pointed out above. Plato hardly threw himself prostrate before the Socratic altar!
Rather, Socratic aporia drove Plato away from Socrates and toward the Forms and other theories he
later espoused.
Hence, Socratic methodology did not lead to knowledge for Plato, except that it filled him with an
insatiable desire for truth. Evidence suggests that Plato realized slowly that there was a source of higher
knowledge. This evidence emerges in Vlastos’ division of the early dialogues into “Elenctic dialogues”
[10]
and “Transitional dialogues.” The transitional dialogues display Plato questioning Socratic
[11]
doctrines, such as in the Protagoras, where Socrates shames, and is shamed in turn by, a sophist. As
the “transitional dialogues” fade into Plato’s middle period, Socratic influences atrophy, while Plato’s
new methodologies take center stage. Though the elenchus appears in both the Meno and the Republic,
Plato uses it cleverly, driving away the rabble so that metaphysics can enter the scene in a more perfect
[12]
philosophical setting. In these works, Plato introduces other sources of knowledge because the
elenchus fails to produce any higher knowledge in his characters. In leaving Socrates behind, in seeking
the answers Socrates never found, and in developing philosophies above and beyond Socratic ideas,
Plato employs a methodology unfamiliar to the Socratic dialogues. Hence, the famous Theory of Forms
does not derive from the elenchus, but from the methodology that Plato replaces the elenchus with. The
inherent contradiction in Socratic methodology brought Plato the desire to find the Forms, but Plato’s
positive methodology is fundamentally different from his teacher’s negative one.
The major difference between the two methodologies is obvious enough: Socrates never comes up with
[13]
knowledge, but Plato delivers truth for those pregnant with its seed. The elenchus only applies
negatively to individual propositions. Socrates makes this obvious in the Gorgias, where he continually
reminds his companions that they must state their own opinions or the discussion must halt. In fact, this
is something of a Socratic theme. The elenchus is only a test for the belief system of an individual, a
sort of consistency meter, and by it Plato never intended to discover universal truth. At least he never
succeeded. Dialectic, as such, was a tool to apply to the diverse opinions of others, but it could produce
no knowledge of itself. Hence, the elenchus is fundamentally negative, only breaking the would-be
philosopher from his chains in the cave.
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 3 of 7
Plato’s Productive Methodology: Literary Criticism
The methodology that Plato applies positively, the one that brought him to a knowledge of eternal truths,
ushers him into the realm of our pondering and wandering post-modernists. Plato spends a great deal of
time in textual criticism and philosophical interpretation, and these become the methodology that
provides Plato with sure knowledge, freeing him from the darkness of the cave and its elenchus. Some
examples illustrate the point. The first good example of literary criticism in Plato’s corpus appears in
the Protagoras, though the knowledge it provides is not quite to the point for Socrates’ argument.
[14]
Protagoras, the great sophist, brings up the subject of poetry. He explores the meaning of a few lines
by Simonides, after which Socrates responds with an interpretation that is superior: “Then Hippias said,
[15]
‘I am favorably impressed by your analysis of this ode, Socrates.’” Perhaps more fundamentally,
every book of Homer’s Iliad is quoted or alluded to somewhere in Plato’s writings except for Book XIII.
[16] [17]
Hesiod is also a popular source of discussion. Other allusions include Apollo’s written sayings
[18] [19] [20]
at Delphi, mythology, the sophists, and the pre-Socratics. Keeping with his lack of
systematicity, Plato never writes an entire dialogue of interpretation or criticism, as, say, Philo of
Alexandria later would. Rather, Plato simply criticizes and interprets continually, interweaving his
positive methodology into texts with other “purposes.”
Though it might be argued that it is simply the “Greek way,” Plato’s approach goes well beyond the
Symposium’s lighthearted discussion about the nature of love. Plato’s exploration includes word studies,
like the Cratylus, which reads about like a dictionary. The Socratic dialogues present other interesting
examples of in-depth word study. In the Euthyphro, Plato explores the meaning of the term ‘piety,’ the
Greek meaning adherence to the cult, but his discussion develops the simple term much farther than that.
[21]
Further, ritual and religious hints in the Republic suggest that Plato’s famous Allegory of the Cave
[22]
is really a commentary on Athenian and Pythagorean initiation rites. The settings of the Symposium
[23]
and the Phaedrus also show Plato’s interest in religious festivals, while the late Laws prove that he
[24]
still sought to interpret Greek religion towards the end of his life. More directly, the Apology is
essentially a long interpretation of the Pythian’s answer to Chaerophon, and, as mentioned before,
Homer and Hesiod continually appear in Plato’s pages as sources of interpretation and criticism. Hence,
Plato’s literary criticism and post-modern methodology lead him well beyond the safe realms of Greek
leisure.
These numerous references suggest a re-evaluation of Plato’s methodology is in order. Plato arrived at
his philosophical opinions through literary criticism and careful interpretation, not through the vehicle of
the elenchus. Interestingly, his approach does not show up after Middle Platonism, Augustine’s
allegorical interpretations being little more than forced sophistry. Even through scholasticism and
epistemology, Plato’s methodology was missing. It was not until Hegel returned to the more mantic
view of history that literary criticism appeared in philosophy again.
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 4 of 7
Similarities and Differences: Plato Among and Against the Post-Modernists
Plato’s literary approach aligns him with the current methodology of post-modernism. At the very birth
of the post-modern period, textual interpretation took center stage in Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit.
His quasi-history develops eventually into a lengthy interpretation of Sophocles’ Antigone. Nietzsche
followed close on his heels in The Birth of Tragedy, urging a rebirth of German spirit by making
criticism on the greats of the Greek poets. In the early twentieth century, Heidegger was writing papers
on German Romantic poetry, while opening Being and Time with a quote from Plato’s The Sophist. At
the same time, Wittgenstein began his Philosophical Investigations with a lengthy literary criticism of a
passage from Augustine’s Confessions. Since then, Derrida has been called a literary critic more than he
has been called a philosopher. There really is no contention that literary criticism is not the
methodology of post-modernism. This brief survey clearly sets Plato comfortably at home in the post-
modern tradition.
So many similarities in methodology, however, do not suggest a similarity in metaphysical doctrines.
Post-modernists themselves emphasize important differences between Platonic and post-modern
metaphysics. For example, Nietzsche’s philosophy was one continual argument against Plato, from The
Birth of Tragedy to Twilight of the Idols. Heidegger focused on the pre-Socratics, especially in his
Parmenides, finding more truth in thinkers previous to Plato. In the analytic tradition, there is no more
common theme than the war against Platonic idealism. Post-modernism is categorically the most
thorough and direct rejection of Platonic philosophy in history. This metaphysical division stands in
contrast to the unity above identified, presenting a serious difficulty to be discussed and analyzed below.
Hegelian Synthesis: Life in the Cave
Stuart Barnett noted in his work, Hegel After Derrida, that Hegel’s work “occupies a unique and
strangely ambivalent position in the history of Western philosophy. It is both the culmination of the
[25]
Western philosophical tradition and the beginning of its dissolution.” Hegel’s philosophy certainly
appears as a turning point in the history of thought. His work, Phenomenology of Spirit, introduced the
philosophy of history at the very time he claimed to bring history to its end. His approach set the rules
for the continental tradition after him, and the analytic tradition grew out of his influence in Britain, and
as a result, no post-modern philosophy quite exhibits the feel of pre-Hegelian philosophy. In 1807,
history came up against a wall with one door only: Hegel’s Romanticism. If Barnett is right, what went
into that door is fundamentally different than what came out: the Western philosophical tradition had
given up the ghost.
The change that occurred with Hegel is rather simple. Hegel himself summarizes it in the introduction
to Phenomenology of Spirit. There he explains that he intended to attack directly the distinction between
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 5 of 7
[26]
the noumenal and the phenomenal, initiated by Descartes, but taken to extremes by Kant. Hegel
[27]
claimed that there is no distinction between the world of experience and the world of reality. This
claim alone ended Western philosophy: philosophy had been, since Plato, hypothesis of another realm, a
truer realm, whether approached in theology or in naturalism. Barnett explains that Hegel historically
finished what began with the logos, and ever since, philosophers have seen themselves as historians of
[28]
empirical data. With the last steps of his historical interpretation, Hegel claimed that his philosophy
[29]
discovered that mankind is God Himself: “History… is a conscious, self-mediating process,”
nothing outside being applicable. With that step, the history of philosophy before him became a
necessary history, but completely untrue and unhelpful nonetheless. Simply put, Hegel redefined
philosophy’s god as mankind collectively.
This “discovered” union of earth and heaven is in clear contrast to Plato’s philosophy. At the heart of
Plato’s metaphysics is the Allegory of the Cave. There the philosopher (and every lover of truth) seeks
to leave the cave to escape into the light of the Forms, but in Hegel, the cave has no exit, and those
within are told that philosophers will henceforward explore the cave only, nothing outside. As all post-
modernism follows Hegel’s metaphysical premise, Plato’s metaphysics are very out of place after 1807;
the Forms are now found inside the cave itself. Hegel lopped off the upper half of the Divided Line,
[30]
walled up the cave, and extinguished the Sun itself.
Science has since become the study of the human condition, something like spelunking in Plato’s hell.
It was only with Hegelian influence that disciplines such as psychology, sociology, and history gained
legitimate grounding. Mankind is since obsessed with discovering what really goes on inside the cave:
mankind has become the mystery that replaced God. A brief look at Peter Berger’s Invitation to
Sociology demonstrates the point. After an aesthetic chapter on the joy of sociology, Berger
[31]
characterizes the discipline as “a form of consciousness.” He suggests that the sociologically aware
person has woken up, ironically calling to mind the same image of Plato’s cave. Berger goes on to
present sociology as a drama that floats back and forth between society confined to a man and man
confined to a society, and so he confirms that the lover of truth (his conscious sociologist) is confined to
the dark recesses of Hegel’s inescapable, underground cavern. Finally, he reduces ethics to: “How to
[32]
Acquire Scruples and Keep On Cheating.” Essentially, post-modernism provides one with a closed
system; mankind must decide what is to be done with it. Utopia is left to social construction, Plato’s
divine realm eliminated.
Sociology is selected at random. Any current field of study could be likewise surveyed, but the point is
clear. The question must now be addressed: why does Plato fall methodologically in with post-
modernism? Ultimately, the truth about the god is in the texts. The texts Plato analyzed and interpreted
were mantic in nature, derived from some heavenly source. Homer and Hesiod, accompanied by other
[33]
poets and the pre-Socratic philosophers, received their works as revelations from the gods. Plato’s
mantic library supplied him with unlimited hints about the world outside the cave, because authors,
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 6 of 7
mankind, were the spokesmen for the gods. In the sophic interim, texts were set aside, simply because
no god was sought. When Hegel united the phenomenal and the noumenal, texts again became the best
source of knowledge of the god, but him redefined. The texts of history came to be revelatory as they
had been for Plato, only the god they now revealed was the one Hegel had defined for post-modernism.
Mankind could study mankind best by studying texts. Historians and textual critics were enthroned.
Hegel restored an approach as he redefined an ideology, bringing methodological life out of
metaphysical death.
Conclusion
Playing off of Christ’s death and resurrection, Hegel’s last lines in his earth-shaking work are fitting:
[34]
“Only from the chalice of this realm of spirits foams forth for Him his own infinitude.” Post-
modernism is a life out of death: Hegel laid Plato’s body in a dark, cave-like grave, but resurrected him
in methodology by seeking a new god under an old name. Whether mankind should feel at home in this
new world or yearn for the mantic past is left to the reader. Whether to find the answer, or because the
answer has been found, the student must turn to the texts.
Notes
[1]
Phaedo 97c. All works by Plato are cited in Stephanus notation, and all direct quotes are taken from Cooper’s collection.
[2]
Vlastos, Gregory, Socrates, Ironist and Moral Philosopher (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991) 46-47.
[3]
Plato implicitly promotes something called the dialectic in the Republic 509d-511e, just after describing the famous
Divided Line. For this reason some believe that the Theory of Forms is the foundational justification for the dialectic or
elenchus.
[4]
Socrates, Ironist and Moral Philosopher 48.
[5]
Euthyphro 5d.
[6]
Laches 190d-e.
[7]
Charmides 159a.
[8]
Apology 22d.
[9]
Crito 54d-e. Apparently, the elenchus does lead to answers—providing particular solutions for real situations—for
Socrates and Crito come to know that one should not break free from jail, and Socrates remains to suffer his sentence on that
account.
[10]
Socrates, Ironist and Moral Philosopher 46-47.
[11]
Interestingly, the Protagoras is one of the earliest dialogues with extensive literary criticism. This will be discussed
below.
[12]
These are the first half of the Meno and the entirety of Book I of the Republic. In both of these works, Plato compares
the elenchus to Greek initiation ritual, likely suggesting a much more complicated understanding of its role, and likely a more
positive understanding. To discuss the full implications of this is beyond the scope of the present work.
[13]
Theaetetus 148e-151e.
[14]
Protagoras 339a. The section of literary criticism extends from this point to 347b, including a rebuttal from Socrates.
[15]
Protagoras 347b.
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006
New Page 1 Page 7 of 7
[16]
Cooper 1773.
[17]
Cooper 1772.
[18]
Protagoras 343b.
[19]
Theaetetus 152a.
[20]
Timaeus 49b-c and Graham, Daniel W., The Texts of Early Greek Philosophy (Unpublished Manuscript, 2003)
Testimony 3.6. This allusion to Anaximenes was pointed out to me by Dr. Graham.
[21]
It is my opinion that the heavy subject of this dialogue actually, and especially Plato’s focus on ritual, places it later in
Plato’s career. Arguments for this must be presented elsewhere.
[22]
Michael Morgan in Platonic Piety: Philosophy and Ritual in Fourth-Century Athens (New Haven: Yale Univesity Press,
1990) 100-157, interprets the Republic as a lengthy commentary on Greek education ritual, such as the Eleusinian mysteries.
Further, Walter Burkert in Greek Religion (Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1985) 280, mentions that Pythagoras
was said to have descended into a cave to be initiated into the higher mysteries. Plato is likely making reference to these
rituals in his allegory.
[23]
Morgan, Michael, “Plato and Greek Religion,” in Richard Kraut, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Plato. (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1992). 232.
[24]
Burkert 332-337.
[25]
Barnett, Stuart, ed. Hegel After Derrida (New York: Routledge, 1998), 26; see also Robert Solomon, In the Spirit of
Hegel. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983) 205.
[26]
Hegel, G.W.F., Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977) 47. Hegel
suggests that this is the Cartesian project, but otherworldliness, as will be discussed below, is as old as Plato’s Allegory of the
Cave.
[27]
Consciousness is immediately acquainted with all of what is in-itself, according to Hegel, and the trail to absolute
knowing is nothing more than the discovery and reconciliation of contradiction within consciousness. See Hegel 52-53.
[28]
Hegel After Derrida 9.
[29]
Hegel 492. Emphases are the translator’s.
[30]
It is interesting that in the penultimate sentence of Hegel’s lengthy work, he calls the last steps of history’s process an
“inwardizing.” See Hegel 493.
[31]
Berger, Peter L., Invitation to Sociology (New York: Anchor Books, 1963) 25.
[32]
Berger 151.
[33]
Vlastos, Gregory, “Theology and Philosophy in Early Greek Thought,” in Daniel W. Graham, ed. Studies in Greek
Philosophy: The Presocratics. (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1995) 3.
[34]
Hegel 493.
file://P:\00OLD\old_aporia_site\volumes\vol132\Postmodernism(Final).htm 8/25/2006