Aporia, Vol. I, No. 1 (Fall 1991)
Theism, Atheism, Dialogue:
The Possibility of a Post-epistemic Philosophy
of Religion
Matthew Stannard
I henomenology distinguishes itself from analytic, prepositional
philosophy in an obvious way. Eugene T. Gendlin writes:
philosophy cannot be based on a study of how the things are in order
to see what( conceptual) approach is most suitable. How we fmd the
things to be already depends on our ^preach...
Much in our conclusions about anything comes not from the
study of things but from the philosophical decisions implicit in the
way we start.( 1967,249)
Those decisions and the definitions that acknowledge them shed
light on phenomenology's call to begin with the things areund us. To
begin so is to begin with the "us" that finds itself in a full range of
humanistic concerns—^political,e thical,e conomic,s piritual, and so on,
recognizing that most ofo ur definitions are either formed in commimity
consensus or utilized in reference to mutual, contextual needs. And if
philosophy can be the history and aesthetic ofo ur shared conversations,
then it must reveal something behind the true/false prepositions that
characterize the analytic playing field.
If we were to paraphrase Gendlin's statement to apply to the
philosophy of religion and sf>ecifically the question of God's existence,
it might read: "Philosophy of religion cannot be based on the truth or
falsity of theism. Whether we find theism to be true depends on the
philosophical approach we choose."
And,I believe,s uch an approach,a nd why we should or should not
take it, is the focus of a post-epistemic philosophy of religion. In such
a possibility,t he redeeming value oft he theistic debate is the demonstra
tion of its dialectical failure.
This essay focuses on the debate between atheists and theists
concerning presumption," an inherent epistemic advantage suppos
edly granted to atheism by virtue of particular argumentive rules such
as parsimony,e veryday-ness, and verifiability. A recent essay by Scott
A. Shalkowski," Atheological Apologetics," questions these assump
tions. Shalkowski shows that the rules of" the i^iilosophy of religion
game"d o notf avor either party prior to the actual debate. My thesis will
go further: the rules themselves,i n fact the whole principle oft he game,
ignore the role of theism and atheism in formulating complicated rule-
theories which emerge from a misunderstood dialogue that invokes
epistemology only within a larger scope of human situations.
The Game of Theism and Atheism
Atheism generally presupposes that the particular criteria, which
reflect the consensus of the scientific and philosophical community,
render religious faith based on nonrational criteria epistemically ille
gitimate. Because epistemic rules resulting from community consensus
are not in themselves enough for conclusive proof, atheists produce a
"trump card": the rules of the philosophical community call for a prior
burden on the theist to produce positive evidence for God's existence,
where anything less than absolute victory on the theists' part will result
in an absolute victory for atheism.
Michael Scriven's "The Presumption of Atheism" systematically
lays out these criteria. Scriven claims that religious "faith" is an
equivocation,s ince we usually claim to have" faith"o nly in things about
which we are reasonably confident( 1987, 364). It is wrong to have
faith in that which lacks evidential support.
Scrivenarguesthat"you... cannotshowthatabeliefinGodisl ikely
to be true just by having confidence in it and by saying (it is)k nowledge
'based on'f aith"( 365). To get the facts, you need a tested methodology,
grounded in everyday reasoning,l ogic and observation (365). In short,
verifiability of everyday reasoning, logic and observation constitutes
truth; science covers all truth, or can potentially do so, and all truth is
scientific.
Religion fails to constitute truth for several reasons. Differences in
religious belief indicate that nothing is universally agreed upon (366).
Religious claims are not testable; methods of testing are often "fixed"
in such a way so as to ensure certain results (366).
For Scriven,t he arguments for something's existence entail:( 1)" all
the evidence which supports the existence claim to any significant
degree," and (2) a comprehensive examination of the area where such
evidence, if any, would appear( 367). Scriven summarizes:
If the critma of religious truth are not connected with the criteria of
everyday truth, then they are not criteria of truth at all and the beliefs
they 'establish' have no... bearing in oiu" lives... no explanation of
what we see around us ... no guidance for our course through time.
(367)
Scriven's more provocative thesis is that, since one need not prove
the nonexistence ofs omething," we need not have a prooft hat God does
not exist in order toj ustify atheism. Atheism is obligatory in the absence
of any evidence for God's existence" (367). Scriven argues that
agnosticism is not the proper response in the absence of proof for God;
instead, one must admit that we cannot reasonably say such a being
exists.'
Shalkowski's article lists five possible reasons why a presumption
would exist against theism:
1-Something makes the position instrinsically suspicious or un
likely.
2-Since the theists" begin"t he debate,a nd introduce the concept of
God, theists have the burden to justify it.
3-Positive claims require proof or evidence, while negative claims
do not.
4-Since all theistic claims fail, atheism wins by default.
5-There is no "need" for theism, since we can explain everything
without it (Shalkowski,paj'ijm).
Shalkowski proceeds to question each of these reasons by applying
various theories of argumentation (1989,1). In the first case,o ne might
presume against an internally inconsistent claim; something which, by
virtue of being a logical impossibility, has a probability of zero. "We
must be wary," Shalkowski warns, "of claims that presumptions and
burdens are functions of objective features of propositions alone"( 1).
Instead, such claims are determined by the information we have. How
this could apply to something with no information is unclear. In sum,
if one can prove that something is necessarily false, then one has good
reason to think that beliefi n it is unwarranted. But ifo ne has such proof,
one needs no presumption (2).
In the second case, Shalkowski asks why theists necessarily must
"start the debate,"a nd whether a" debate"f ormat is a proper or desirable
way to think about justification.
Given what I take is common philosophical lore, that defeating the
skeptic is well nigh impossible,i tf ollows that we are unjustified in our
common-sense beliefs. So, for atheists who are not ready to accept
general skepticism, this way of posing the problem about theism is
conuary to the way they generally think about justification.( 4)
He continues: "if anyone knows anything, it is in virtue of having
good giTounds for believing it. This applies to theism and atheism
equally"( 4). Many of our beliefs are grounded in improven assertions,
and it is uimeasonable for theism to bear burdens which other areas ofl ife
are allowed to conveniently ignore. So it seems unreasonable to
automatically assume that one side begins the debate with a particular
burden of proof.
In the third case, atheists' assertion that positive existence claims
require evidence, while negative existence claims do not is silly, since
to prove I don't exist, or this computer doesn't exist would certainly
require radical evidential reinterpretation. Where God is concerned,t he
atheist has the advantage of God's apparent absence from the epistemic
playing field. Shalkowski replies that even a casual examination of so-
called positive and negative existence claims shows that the difference
between their content is minimal and irrelevant Making one type of
claim subsumes making the other (5).
Shalkowski points out that Scriven ignores "evidence for the exis
tence of God—'religious'e xperience, testimony, alleged miracles and
the like. Scriven may well think that this is insufficient to warrant belief
in God," but even so,
if there were no evidence at all for belief in God this would legitimize
merely agnosticism unless there is evidence against the existence of
God ... not by some presumption in (atheism's) favor, but by some
plausible case to be made in its favor.( 7)
In the fourth case, the argument by default confuses the lump sum
ofa U past theistic proofs with" theism in general."E ven if all past proofs
have failed,t his is scarcely more than the acknowledgement that theistic
arguments arc advanced by "a dull and not a terribly clever lot" of
philosophers( 7). But again,t his hardly establishes" presumption." The
skeptic might be more clever than us aU. In any case, arguments are not
commonly won by default; until one side or the other advances a
10
conclusive position, the issue remains unresolved. "It is somewhat
mysterious" Shalkowski muses," why conditions on proof which are
recognized as defective in most contexts would seem relevant for
theistic apologetics"( 7).
The last possible warrant for presumption concerns whether or not
theism is "necessary" given the current state of science. God is seen by
atheism as an explanatory postulate, unnecessary, since all physical
things can be explained with simpler hypotheses without such an
unlikely thesis as God. Such an argument assumes what it wants to
prove:" some case such that on its basis,i t looks as though God does not
exist." Otherwise, God may well be a possible explanation (9).
Questioning The Game
If atheists are to maintain argumentative integrity,t he most they can
claim is that, given a specific context,a set of precise( though somewhat
arbitrarily applied)e pistemic rules, and an inteipretation of those rules
based on contextual needs, atheism or agnosticism is preferable to
theism. It is, of course, possible for atheists to make aiguments
justifying their specific context,r ules,a nd needs. Understandably,s uch
arguments are difficult to find in the range of atheological apologetics;
for even if these arguments are convincing, they must begin from the
same assumption that Shalkowski begins with, that the debate between
theists and atheists is a "game"—not something phenomenologically
"real" and not doing justice to the full range of human experience.
Perhaps we can presently advance a thesis which would do justice
to my task here. We invent games to fulfill needs. The fact that those
games often succeed is no warrant for them being assigned a greater
degree of" reality" than other games. The rules of" Monopoly" do not,
and could not, include that we ought to play "Monopoly" or that it is a
superior game to "Risk," 'Twister" or "Dungeons and Dragons."
"Monopoly" advocates may respond that some higher set of rules
governing game-playing itself might well favor one game,b ut ofc ourse
such an ar^gument launches us into a regress.
So one thesis we can advance here is that, since context determines
epistemic burdens and is not itself an epistemic situation, presumption
originates in a post-contextual ethical maxim—an" ought"—rathert han
from any "is." Because atheists might be willing to acknowledge this
and simply argue forthe instrumental superiority oft heir game rules, we
11
can here enter a dialogue with atheism by examining the way those rules
are made.
This raises the question of where we might place ourselves to begin
the examinatioa Since Shalkowski and I believe that the game and its
rules depend on what situation one is in, we could create a different
situation in order to test whether atheological rules are indeed justifiable
in the face of human experience. Quick to point out that he is only
musing, Shalkowski hypothesizes:
suppose we begin teaching philosophy of religion to a class and the
reigning intellectual and social pedisposition is to think that theism
is the liberal view which frees one from the shackles of narrow,
atheistic explanations of the cosmos, human history, and the mean-
ingfulness of life. ... There have historically been people of high
degrees of intelligence... who have disbelieved the existence of God
and for a long period our social and intellectual tradition was atheistic,
but after a religious enlightenment this has changed,t hough there are
still conservative strongholds of unbelief and spiritual revivals. ...
Since the shift in context I have envisioned requires no shift in the
weight of evidence, we will see that atheism is no better off than
theism, contrary to the reigning intellectual climate.( 9)
Obviously, we arc stacking the deck,a nd ought to feel no shame for
this, since we have found every deck to be stacked, and have chosen to
concentrate on the ways in which stacking occurs and the relationship
between various stacks.
In the manuscript for his Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion,
Hegel presents the very context Shalkowski hypothetically proposes to
invalidate the presumption of atheism. Hegel sermonizes:
There was a time when [one]c ared, was driven indeed,t o know God,
to fathom his nature—a time when spirit had no peace,a nd could find
none, except in this pursuit...
Our age has renounced this need and our efforts to satisfy it; we are
done with it... It is no longer a grief to our age that it knows nothing
of God;r ather it counts as the highest insight that this cognition is not
even possible.( 1984,87)
How is Hegel stacking his deck? Hegel calls this transformation
"arrogant" and "the last step in the degradation of humanity" (88).
12
Again, one must know Hegel's context to know that it is indeed
degrading to deny the human relationship to the divine—which the
Enlightenment erases in favor of the exaltation of positivist cognition,
the abandonmento fgenuine community in favor ofmutual exploitation,
and the abandonment of the search for Truth in favor of the quest for
personal advantage.
We are more concerned, however, with Hegel's account of the
dialogue between theism and atheism, particulariy regarding the confu
sion of epistemology and primal context. Much dialectical failure
results from this confusion. Without committing ourselves to the
Hegelian universe, we can isolate this confrontation as an illustration of
the epistemic attack on Faith.
Hegel's Phenomenology ofS pirit contains an account of the con
frontation between Faith,t he side of Hegel's developing consciousness
which acknowledges Truth as a transcendent reality, and Enlighten
ment, the side whose defining characteristic is to use its "Insight" to
question and dismantle the presuppositions of Faith.
Because Faith acknowledges Truth as transcendent reality, reality
not open to questions of authenticity (though perhaps to questions of
interpretation). Faith carmot participate,o n those terms,i n an epistemic
debate. Faith acknowledges the transcendent Truth through what Hegel
caUs "picture-thinking." Most ofI nsight's dialectical shortcomings are
further complicated by both sides' ambiguities concerning what is real
in a transcendent, and hence unprovable sense, and what is real in a
pictured, or propositional and epistemic sense. Essentially, Insight
forces Faith to reduce its non-propositional beliefs to a set of proposi
tions. By demonstrating what Hegel would see as the frailty ofu ndevel
oped consciousness in this confrontation, we can see the emergence of
non-genuine dialogue: the failure to answer the demand of the other
side, the dishonesty of advocacy, and absolutizing as an escape from
accountability.
Insight presently recognizes its identity only in the function of
questioning (though later it will presume to offer a system of its own),
and can only be actualized by "borrowing" content from its object of
ridicule: the images of Faith (Hegel 1977, 324, 329).
At this point.I nsight must begin its attack not by building a case,b ut
by tearing down the case of Faith. Faith is a truth-candidate placed in
question by Insight. Insight still lacks content. Faith, on the other hand.
13
has an active component: tnisL Tnist is a positive commitment: an
affimiation and commitment of self-consciousness into the divine
(334).
Insight cannot see the individual-transcendent nature of rational
consciousness.T he acknowledgement ofs uch a transcendence requires
a positive action; a trust, or self-projection into itself. Insofar as it only
continues to negate. Insight is not capable of this.
Here,I nsight commits its first communicative failure as a critic.T he
critic cannot, or will not, see the truth in the truth-candidate. The critic
is willing to ignore the sentiment and conviction of the candidate, is
willing to accuse it of both ignorance and dishonesty without realizing
the contradiction oft hose accusations( 335),a nd in all respects is willing
to turn away from the candidate ethically while confronting it" intellec
tually." Inasmuch as it does so, the critic fails to answer the essential
demand of the candidate: charity in interpretation. "Enlightenment,"
Lauer interprets," is incapable of comprehending the ground of belief,
absolute spirit giving testimony to itself( 1982, 205).
The second failure closely follows.T he critic holds the candidate to
a standard the critic itselfc annot uphold,a nd then pretends to uphold the
standard in a superior way. Insight is questioned by the same demands
it makes on Faith: What do you have to offer? "Discrediting belief
accomplishes nothing positive; it in no way establishes the opposite of
what is believed... rationalism cannotjustify itself( 204). Insightmust
answer these demands by postulating a transcendence, a projection of
its own. Otherwise, it is nothing more than the glorification of
emptiness." The attribution of predicates to such a vacuum would be in
itself reprehensible." In fact, it would reduce Insight to the undesirable
level on which it has placed Faith (Hegel 1977, 340).
Searching for at least apparent certainty. Insight turns to the obvi
ous: sensory experience. Sense-certainty is seen as absolute certainty.
Insight now forgets that the very absolutism it questioned in Faith has
become an attribute it has assigned to sense certainty. The experienced
is seen as the True (341).
Insight may reply that sense-certainty does not call for the specula
tive objectification that Faith commits concerning Faith's images. In its
defense it may invoke certain "principles" which justily calling sense-
certainty Truth. For example. Insight might propose the principle of
parsimony,o r a" shift"i n the burden of proof to the side oft he argument
making the unverifiable sensory claim, or even the verifiability prin-
14
ciple itself.
These defenses are ad hoc and impotent,s ince the" principles"o nly
occur so far as their assumptions are based on the certainty of sense
experience. Insight's defenses make sense only within their own para
digm, and do not justify the choice of that paradigm over some other.
Thus, as Insight asks Faith to "verify" Faith's religious claim. Faith
could just as easily ask Insight to pray about its most recent scientific
discovery. Neither side sees the point to the other's request.
"In utteriy rejecting belief it has rejected all the forms ofc onscious
ness which necessarily culminate in belief, and,i n so doing, has raised
sense-certainty to 'absolute truth'"( Lauer 1982,206). Thus, its epis-
temic certainty is the direct result of its rejection of the beliefs of its
opponent. Epistemic principle arises from ethical utterance.
This attitude's results are political. Once sense-experience has been
given the stamp of absolute certainty," (t)he platitude of utilitarianism
is the logical outcome of enlightened insight" (206), and reason is
viewed as a means to attain advantage.
Not only is speculative thinking sacrificed, but the primacy of the
community is lost—the search for the divine (which is a communal
search, both in Hegel's view and in traditional Christianity) has become
a search for individual power. This is" a world of no depth,... in which
things are only what they are immediately... in which individuals are
shut up in their natural egoism and are linked to each other only by
considerations of interest (Hyppolite 1974,446). And this allows the
more sinister character of Insight to subordinate Faith, to make it one
more component of serviceability (Hegel 1977, 343). Placed in that
realm. Faith's demands can be forever silenced, shelved along with
other useless, unanswerable sentiments (349).
To summarize: in Hegel's confrontation, atheism does not commu
nicate with theism, but destroys, ignores or ridicules theism by using
arguments. There is a clear distinction between the ethical-contextual
origin of Enlightenment and the epistemic methodology it employs.
Failing to admit this distinction results in three failures:
(1) The critic refuses to interprete others charitably. It refuses to
recognize the believer's account of belief, and postulates alternative
origins—"Enlightenment tells the believer what it is he really believes"
(Lauer 1982,205). This is a paradox: either Faith is reduced to nothing,
and the essence of the believer destroyed, in which case a judgment is
irrelevant; or Insight can make no judgment at all, since Faith's context
15
and paradigm is radically different than Enlightenment.
(2) The critic is hypocritical. Atheism cannot justify its own
epistemic ground in a way that is objectively superior to theism. It must
offer a transcendence of its own, or else it is empty. But the transcen
dence offered—merely sensoiy positivism—is not epistemicahy veri
fiable. It cannot prove itself.
(3) The critic disguises its ethical assumptions as principles of
epistemic "truth." Insight offers utilitarianism in the guise ofc ertainty.
Its new "laws" of exchange cannot imderstand Faith on Faith's own
terms. Ironically,t his constitutes a phenomenological failure as well as
an ethical one,s ince it is "too abstract and too impoverished to express
the finite richness which seems to constitute human experience"
(Hyppolite 1974, 446). Moreover, in conquering Faith dialecticaUy,
Insight merely retains "many of the ideas that were formerly the
province of Faith" (Kainz 1983, 62), even though Insight earlier
condemned those ideas as absurd.
Conclusion
Scott Shalkowski questions the rules governing the game we call
"philosophy of religion." In doing so, he paved the way for us to
question the game itself, to envision a deconstruction that would allow
us to move beyond epistemology on to more relevant questions.
What remains is to create those questions from a new field. If such
a field seems difficult to envision, perhaps this is due to our preoccupa
tion with still more stale analytical questions. Peihaps we are still
trapped in a paradigm which imagines that the mles we create have an
objective origin somewhere outside of us. Peihaps we are stiU confus
ing the game with the purpose of games:t o fulfill whatever needs were
there before we started playing.
Endnote
I am grateful to David Paulsen for helpful insight and discus
sion, as well as the opportunity to discuss these issues with his
Philosophy 215 students.
16
Bibliography
Gendlin,E ugene T." Analysis" In Martin Heidegger, What is a Thing?
Indiana: Regnery/Gateway, Inc., 1967.
Hegel, G.W.F. Phenomenology ofS pirit. Trans, by A.V . Miller. Oxford
University Press, 1977.
.L ectures on the Philosophy ofR eligion volume one:I ntroduction
and The Concept of Religion. Translated by R.F. Brown, et al.
Edited by Peter C. Hodgson. Berkley: University of California
Press, 1984.
Hyppolite, Jean. Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of
Spirit. Trans, by Samuel Cherinak and John Heckman. Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1974.
Kainz, Howard P. Hegel's Phenomenology, Part II. Athens: Ohio
University Press, 1983.
Lauer, Quentin. A Reading ofH egel's Phenomenology ofS pirit. New
York: Fordham University Press, 1982.
Scriven, Michael. "The Presumption of Atheism." In Philosophy of
Religion. Louis P. Pojman, ed. Belmont, California: Wadsworth,
1987.
Shalkowski, Scott A. "Atheological Apologetics." American Philo
sophical Quarterly 26\\ (January 1989):1 -16.
17