Apcfria Vol. 9, 1999
The Two Freedoms: The Possibility and
Function of Free and LaW'Iike Imagination
Andrew Stewart
Kant's account of aesthetic judgments forms a difficult theory to
maintain. Kant puts himself in a tremendously challenging situation by
arguing for the universal validity of judgments of taste while at the same
time specifically denying that judgments of taste can have any basis in
concepts, but rather in a subjective delight that wells up inside of us as a
result of the subjective finality of an object serving as the determining
ground of our judgment. Although the language he uses is not completely
perspicuous, Kant is extremely clear about the source of this delight that
wells up inside of us and gives us the ability to make an aesthetic judgment;
it is caused by the harmony of the imagination and the understanding.
By making this claim, however, Kant leads himself into another dire
strait on the road to a priori vindication of aesthetic judgments. The
problem lies in the fact that Kant describes the imagination as, in some
sense, free and capable of "exerting an activity of its own" (Judgement
240).' By itself this claim is not difficult to accept, but its consistency with
viewing understanding as a law-like cognitive faculty causes problems
since the harmonization of imagination and understanding requires that
imagination "be both free and of itself conformable to law," which "is a
Andrew Stewart is a senior at Wake Forest University. He plans to pursue
graduate studies in philosophy in the fall of 2000 at the University of Pennsylvania
with main research interests in Kant and the history of modem philosophy.
'The references to Kant will be given by the page numbers in the
Prussian Academy Edition of Kant's Gesammelte Schriften. The English trans
lations of the Critique of Judgment are from the Meredith translation, and
translations of the Critique of Pure Reason are from the Kemp Smith transla
tion.
60 ANDREW STEWART
contradiction" (241). In order to resolve the contradiction, I will first
explore Kant's notion of imagination in its productive capacity. Then I
will show that the free law-likeness of the imagination in a judgment of
taste is consistent precisely because of the nature of the freedom that the
imagination demonstrates, i.e., its productive rather than reproductive
nature allows it to be free while sometimes subsuming its own powers
under those of the understanding. Finally, it is this apparent contradic
tion of the autonomy of freedom acting in a law-like manner that gives
Kant grounds to call the beautiful a symbol of morality.
The faculty of imagination has two different capacities—productive
and reproductive. The reproductive capacity of the imagination (which
Kant also calls the "empirical faculty of imagination") is integral to the
process of cognition in general for it is through this faculty that we can
"reinstate a preceding perception alongside the subsequent perception .. .
to form a whole series of perceptions"( Reason A121). If the imagination
did not reproduce perceptions so that we may develop a view of the
empirical world as an actual series of perceptions, unity of apperception
would not be possible, and without this important possibility, a unitary
experience would no longer be possible. The productive capacity of the
imagination is crucial to cognition as well. The productive capacity of
the imagination (which Kant also calls "pure a priori imagination")
yields schemata, the grounds of our pure sensible concepts. Through
schemata we can connect actual images (provided by the reproductive
capacity of the imagination) with pure sensible concepts and thus have
a possible unitary experience.
Kant focuses on the productive capacity of the imagination in his
Critique of Judgment when he attempts to explain the possibility of the
freedom of the imagination and its harmonization with the under
standing and subsequent law-likeness. The reproductive imagination is
passive in the sense that it merely takes up the images we intuit, repro
duces them, and synthesizes them for the sake of cognition in general.
Empirical imagination is bound by the laws of association, and their
binding force makes this capacity of the imagination unfree. In its repro
ductive capacity, then, the imagination can truly be considered at the
service of the understanding (Judgment 242). Through these mundane
functions of the reproductive imagination (which is bound by the laws
of association given by the understanding) we are able to "[give] the
manifold its determinate form" (242), i.e., we can make claims of
THE TWO FREEDOMS 61
knowledge by means of determinate concepts. Kant states numerous
times in emphatic language that although judgments of taste have a
claim to necessity, this necessity does not rest on concepts: "Since an
aesthetic judgment is not an objective or cognitive judgment, this
necessity is not derivable from definite concepts" (237). Judgments of
taste are based on the feeling of delight we have upon the observation
of a beautiful object. This feeling of delight is a direct result of" the accord,
in a given intuition, of the faculty of presentation, or the imagination,
with the faculty of concepts that belongs to understanding or reason"
(244). The pleasure resulting from this harmony of the faculties is
clearly not the result of the mundane relationship of the reproductive
imagination with the understanding, for that is a relationship that is
based on determinate concepts.
The delight on which the judgment of taste relies comes from a
harmony of the faculties of imagination (in its productive capacity) and
understanding. The reason this harmony focuses on the productive
capacity of the imagination is that it is this very aspect of the imagination
that is unbounded by the laws of association. In other words, the pro
ductive imagination has no dependence on concepts, which makes it
the perfect collaborative faculty for judgments of taste that also can
have no dependence on concepts.
The freedom of the productive imagination has both negative and
positive aspects.^ In the negative sense, freedom of the imagination is its
independence from the constraint placed upon it by the rules of con
cepts (Judgment 229—30). The action in which the imagination engages
as a result of its negative freedom constitutes its freedom in a positive
sense. Unfettered by concepts, the imagination "exert[s] an activity of
its own (as originator of arbitrary forms of possible intuitions)" (240).
This activity of its own" goes well beyond the passive capabilities of the
reproductive imagination since it is able to furnish its own "arbitrary
forms of possible intuitions" rather than be limited to the images that
are presented to it. In this active sense, the productive imagination is
positively free, for it goes beyond mere acceptance and recreation of
^In casting the freedom of imagination in positive and negative terms, I
am following Paul Guyer in chapter 6 of Kant and the Claims of Taste, page
251.
62 ANDREW STEWART
images and by doing this shows that it is "a powerful agent for creating,
as it were, a second nature out of the material supplied to it by actual
nature"( 314). Although we cannot really describe these creations of the
imagination (arbitrary forms of possible intuitions), we can say that they
go beyond the scope of ordinary intuitions that can be subsumed under
concepts because, as Kant says, "aesthetically [the imagination] is free to
furnish of its own accord, over and above that agreement with the con
cept, a wealth of undeveloped material for the understanding" (317).
So, Kant is clear that the imagination has a freedom to furnish the under
standing with all sorts of intuitions. For the purposes of this discussion, it
is only necessary that we acknowledge this ability of the imagination, not
that we understand exactly what these intuitions are.
Kant is willing to abdicate not only negative but also positive
freedom to the imagination in his account of aesthetic judgments, but
this easy abdication leads him right into a nasty contradiction out of
which it seems there is no resolution. The contradiction can be stated
succinctly; a judgment of taste is made based on the subjective delight
caused by the harmony of the imagination and understanding, but this
harmony arises from the imagination conforming in its free capacity to
the law of the understanding. If this is true how can the imagination be
acting freely at the same time as it is acting in a manner conformable to
law? A man of tremendous experience at dismantling antinomies, Kant
shows the way out of this contradiction with typical Kantian elegance.
Amazingly, it is the free, productive nature of the imagination that
allows the imagination to have its autonomy while conforming to law.
Ordinarily, when the understanding and imagination collaborate
to gain knowledge by giving the manifold determinate form, it is clear
how the imagination, acting in its reproductive capacity, acts in a law
like manner. For cognition in general, the imagination is at the service
of the understanding; however, this law-like manner of the imagination
is not the source of our problem. The contradiction arises from the fact
that when we perceive an object of beauty our experience is supposed to
be outside of the jurisdiction of concepts while cognition in general is
necessarily conceptual. The imagination, in its freedom, allows us to
step out of the restrictive conceptual framework of cognition in general,
but the delight that arises in us as a result of imagination's free play is rule
governed. It seems that if the free play of imagination conforms to the
laws of understanding when we make an aesthetic judgment, then the
THE TWO FREEDOMS 63
activity constitutive of these judgments is no different than the activity
which underlies cognition in general; in both cases the imagination is
conforming to the laws of the understanding.
The distinction that resolves this apparent contradiction relies on
the freedom of the productive imagination. When discussing this
contradiction, Kant suggests the solution by examining the motion of
the imagination when confronted with an object that is rightfully
deemed beautiful:
Still it is easy to conceive that the object may supply ready-made
to the imagination just such a form of the arrangement of the
manifold, as the imagination, if it were left to itself[ my emphasis]
would freely project in harmony with the general conformity to the
law of understanding (240—41).
The key to this explanation lies in the nature of the "ready-made . . .
form of the arrangement of the manifold" that the beautiful object delivers
to the imagination. By coincidence (or maybe by the deliberate but
ineffable workings of genius), the "ready-made form" happens to coincide
with one of the arbitrary intuitions that the imagination in its productive
freedom would have yielded "if it were left to itself," but still conformed
with the law of understanding out of its own accord. At this point it is
important to stress the negative freedom to which the imagination lays
claim. To stretch Kant's own terminology, in the previously explained
example, the imagination acts in accordance with the laws of the under
standing but not from the laws of the understanding as the reproductive
imagination does when synthesizing the manifold into a unitary expe
rience. The negative freedom of the productive imagination (freedom
from the constraint of concepts) allows for the possibility of the positive
freedom it has to actively move beyond the dominion of concepts. The
harmonization of the faculties is not a result of the understanding, with
the power of its laws, having control over the intuitions the productive
imagination furnishes but rather the productive imagination furnishing
an arbitrary intuition that goes along with the type of intuition the laws
of understanding would have demanded.
Although the contradiction is resolved, the precise inner workings
of the harmony of the faculties in a judgment of taste are still difficult to
grasp. From Kant's account of the imagination in the first Critique, one
64 ANDREW STEWART
may think that the imagination is always subordinated to the faculty of
understanding since, even in its productive capacity, the imagination is
said to provide schema by which images can be connected to concepts
{Reason A141^2/B181). It seems as if this relationship has been
revetsed in the third Critique when Kant alludes to the dominance of the
imagination in aesthetic judgments. When we make a judgment of taste
and feel the delight resulting from the harmony of the faculties based on
no determinate concept," understanding is at the service of imagination"
(Judgment 242). To make sense of this apparent subordination of under
standing to the imagination, recall that the ptoductive imagination
is free to fiimish of its own accord, over and above that agreement
with the concept, a wealth of undeveloped material for the under
standing, to which the latter paid no regard in its concept, but
which it can make use of, not so much objectively for cognition, as
subjectively for quickening the cognitive faculties (Judgment 317).
When a subject observes an object that can rightfully be called beautiful,
the imagination, in its unboundedness, causes a feeling of delight since
it furnishes a ready-made intuition which harmonizes with the under
standing. In this sense, then, the imagination is the dominant of the two
faculties since its range is free, as it were, while the range of the under
standing is restrained by its concepts. But is Kant really committed to
the reversal of the dominance of the faculties when functioning for
cognition in general and when functioning in judgments of taste?
Such a radical role-reversal is not Kant's intention by speaking of
the understanding being in service of the imagination. In chapter 35
Kant gives a lucid account of the workings of the cognitive faculties
when making a judgment of taste:
Since the freedom of the imagination consists precisely in the fact
that it schematizes without a concept, the judgment of taste must
found upon a mere sensation of the mutually quickening of the
imagination in its freedom, and of the understanding with its con-
formity to law. . . . Taste, then, as a subjective power of judgment,
contains a principle of subsumption, not of intuitions under con
cepts but of the faadty of intuitions or presentations, i.e. of the
imagination, under the faculty of concepts, i.e. the understanding
THE TWO FREEDOMS 65
SO far as the former in its freedom accords with the latter in its con
formity to law (Judgment 287).
This passage shows us that Kant does not consider the understanding as
at the service of the imagination when making aesthetic judgments.
The whole faculty of the imagination does not subsume itself under the
understanding in the sense that it works for the understanding (as in
cognition in general). Instead the imagination subsumes itself "in its
freedom meaning that it only happens to accord with the conformity to
law of the understanding and there is no compulsion involved.
How can we be sure that the passage in chapter 35 describes
Kant's true understanding of the relationship of the faculties in a judg
ment of taste? We need to turn to context for the answer. When Kant
says that "understanding is at the service of imagination" when we make
judgments of taste, he is speaking (as he often does in the third Critiqiie)
about the actual feeling of the individual at the moment of her delightful
experience. The individual only feels as if understanding is at the service
of the imagination since the imagination, in its freedom, "puts the faculty
of intellectual ideas (reason) into motion" (Judgment 315). So the actual
ontological relationship of the faculties remains the same when making a
judgment of taste, but the phenomenological relationship is altered.
Kant has some very important reasons for giving a phenomeno
logical account of the feeling of delight which characterizes a judgment
of taste. The most obvious reason is that Kant concedes that this delight
is something that cannot be demonstrated without experience since it is
not based on concepts in any way. The subjective feeling defines the judg
ment of the beautiful so it is crucial that Kant give some account not only
of what happens (as in chapter 35) but also how it feels when it happens.
The primary function of the feeling of delight is that it gives us a
signal that an object is beautiful. The feeling of delight, however, has
ignificance beyond this primary function. It is through our experience
s
of the freedom of the imagination that we are given a symbol of moral
ity.' In order to give such an account, Kant needed to delineate his
'Here I am following Paul Guyer in chapter 1 (especially pages 39—41) of
Kant and the Experience of Freedom by using the importance of the feeling of the
freedom of the imagination as an analogue to the freedom of the moral law.
66 ANDREW STEWART
phenomenological account of delight so we could understand how the
feeling off reedom of the imagination does well up inside of us when we are
confronted with a beautiful object.
We are now in a position to examine and understand how and why
Kant argues that beauty is a symbol of morality. First, Kant separates the
"intuitions by which a priori concepts are given a foothold" into "either
schemata or symbols" (Judgment 352). The difference between symbols
and schemata is the manner in which they present a concept; schemata
present directly while symbols present indirectly. The indirect way that
symbols present a concept is by the use of analogy. Symbolic presentation
of a concept takes place because it is impossible for that concept to be
directly presented through schemata.
Now it should be fairly clear how it is that beauty functions as a
symbol of morality. The freedom of the imagination that we feel when
we experience delight from a beautiful object is a wonderful analogy for
the law-like freedom of action from duty. When the imagination, in its
freedom, subsumes itself under the understanding in its law-like form,
"judgment does not find itself subjected to a heteronomy of laws of
experience as it does in the empirical estimate of things—in respect of
the objects of such a pure delight it gives the law to itself, just as reason
does in respect of the faculty of desire" (Judgment 353). Kant compares
the heteronomy of the will and sensible desires to the heteronomy of
the imagination and cognitive goals. The analogy is transparent: just as
the will acts freely from the determination of natural laws but still acts
from the moral law, so does the imagination act freely from the
determination of concepts but still acts in accordance with the under
standing in its conformity to law.
Perhaps it is easy to examine the Critique of Judgment as an
interesting and important text in the history of aesthetic theory, since
its main thrust is explicating the search for a principle of the faculty of
judgment as evidenced by estimates of the beautiful and sublime. To
stop there, however, would be a shame. Kant's efforts in the third
Critique are explicitly presented with a view to the "transcendental
aspects" of taste (170). Through this view we can understand why Kant
would go to such lengths to explain the inherently obscure free play of
the faculties and their relationships to judgments of taste. By reading
Kant's third Critique we do not gain a determinate sense of what consti
tutes art or good art for that matter (that would require a basis on
THE TWO FREEDOMS 67
concepts). We can, however, make connections between the experience
of the beautiful and its relationship to our cognitive faculties to give us
a sense of the type of knowledge we receive when we appreciate art or
nature. The fact that beauty functions as a symbol of morality gives
judgments of taste a significance that transcends the mere experience of
aesthetic appreciation by helping us to understand the autonomy which
we are all called, by our rational nature, to participate in and experience.''
'I would like to thank Josefine Nauckhoff for her helpful comments on
earlier drafts of this paper.
ANDREW STEWART
Works Cited
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Taste. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1979.
. Kant and the Experience of Freedom. New York: Cambridge UP,
1993.
Kant, Immanuel. The Critique ofJudgment. Trans. James Creed Meredith.
New York: Oxford UP, 1952.
. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Werner S. Plukar. Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Company Inc., 1996.