Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
The Hermeneutics of Testimony:
Ricoeur and an LDS Perspective
AlexAnder Struk
Bearing testimony is a central aspect of LDS religious practice and
experience. Testimony, or the profession of faith, plays a distinc-
tive role in personal and shared religious experiences. One cannot
observe LDS practices without being struck by the culture of certainty com-
municated through monthly testimony meetings, the emphasis of many
programs and initiatives on gaining a personal testimony, or the solemn
and even apostolic testimonies borne by our leaders. Why is testimony so
important to us? Principally because faith in Christ is the first principle of
the gospel and is necessary for salvation, not only as a belief but as a living
force evidenced by our actions. Our testimonies become a central source
of motivation in our lives and have a primary influence on our actions.
For latter-day saints a testimony implies a number of elements including a
strong emphasis on bearing testimony, a culture of certainty characterized
by statements like “I know . . . ,” and a specific content that includes bear-
ing witness of not only God and Jesus Christ, but also of the Restoration,
the Book of Mormon, and the current prophet. The testimony we seek is
identified as a gift from the Spirit, a gift from God to the earnest seeker.
Because of the importance that testimony has in LDS religious practices,
it is appropriate to discuss it from a philosophical perspective in the hope
that it will deepen our understanding and appreciation of what it means
to testify.
This paper explores the question, “How should we think about tes-
timony?” More specifically, it aims at making connections between the
philosopher Paul Ricoeur’s work on testimony and LDS examples and
Alexander Struk is a senior majoring in philosophy and international relations. His
primary academic interests include epistemology, ethics, and philosophy of religion.
This essay took third place in the 2009 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
46 AlexAnder Struk
practices, in the hope that such a comparison will help latter-day saints
gain a greater understanding of what it means to bear testimony. The first
section of the paper summarizes many of Ricoeur’s contributions to the
philosophy of testimony. Ricoeur seeks to determine whether a philosophy
of testimony is even possible. He analyzes testimony bearing from a seman-
tic perspective, providing language and terms to describe the philosophical
aspects of testimony. Furthermore, his analysis illuminates the juridical struc-
ture that shapes the meaning of the word “testimony.” He builds on this
model through an analysis of prophetic discourse as it appears in the
Bible—culminating in the trial of Jesus Christ. The second part of the paper
applies Ricoeur’s insights to the Book of Mormon. In particular, the trial of
Abinadi closely resembles both prophetic discourse in the Old Testament
and the trial of Jesus Christ, making it an ideal place to test Ricoeur’s ideas.
Finally, the third part of the paper focuses on the potential of Ricoeur’s
ideas to affect and enlarge the way we think about our own testimonies and
the role we play in bearing them. Examining Ricoeur’s work leads to new
insights and a philosophic understanding that is useful in articulating the
LDS practice of bearing testimony.
I. Ricoeur and a Semantic Analysis
of Testimony and Prophetic Discourse
Ricoeur begins by stating that testimony is quasi-empirical: it desig-
nates the act of relating what one has seen or heard. It is not perception of
the event itself, but the story or narration of an event. The witness is the
author. He reports personal experiences and shifts the discourse from
the level of things seen to the level of things said (123). Testimony also
implies a dual relationship: the testifier (who has seen) and the hearer (who
has not seen and must rely on what is heard to judge the facts in question).
Thus, another aspect of testimony is that it is a tool for judgment. We rely
on the statement or story to form an opinion of the meaning of what has
happened. In other words, testimony seeks to prove, to justify, and to show
something to us. Therefore, testimony is not just a statement about some-
thing witnessed but an account used in support of a judgment, giving rise
to the judiciary sense of testimony (124).
Ricoeur observes that not every account is a testimony; the act of tes-
tifying has a relation to a place or institution. Specifically, testimony makes
reference to a trial which calls for testimony to settle a dispute between
two or more parties. We always testify for or against something. Both legal
discourse and the notion of the trial model certain traits of testimony and
give rise to the quasi-judicial aspect of testimony (125). In a legal judgment
the hermeneuticS of teStimony 47
we cannot have certainty, only probability, and the probable is pursued
through a struggle of opinion. Another trait of legal judgment is that it
is defeasible, meaning that any judgment can be contested or invalidated
(126). Furthermore, in a quasi-judicial sense, testimony is a kind of proof,
part of the rhetorical level of discourse aimed at getting a certain judg-
ment. Drawing on Aristotle’s work in the Rhetoric, Ricoeur demonstrates
that testimony is a non-technical proof, meaning that it is external to the
arguments the orator makes (127). The judge and judgment become
dependent on something exterior, to things seen or heard. In this context,
the credibility of the testimony and the quality of the witness take on the
utmost importance.
For Ricoeur, the problem of false witness is centered more in sincerity
than accuracy. Thus, a false witness is not defined as an error in the account
of things experienced, but as a lie in the heart of the witness. The evil
intention in false witness is “fatal to the exercise of justice” (128). But what
defines a true witness? The witness is not merely a reporter: he testifies
“for” or “to” something, implying a public conviction to a cause or inter-
pretation of events that can extend even to the sacrifice of life. Inherent in
being a witness is the possibility of becoming a martyr, a relationship that is
suggested in the fact that the root word for martyr means “to witness” (129).
Yet one does not become a martyr unless one is on trial, and in a normal
judicial setting the one on trial is the accused, not the witness. So when
does the witness become the accused and risk becoming a martyr? Ricoeur
states it is when society or the powerful hate certain causes, even the most
just ones (129). The “persecuted just” are exemplified by such men as
Socrates or Jesus, who faced death for their unwavering witnesses. It is
within this context that Ricoeur focuses on the word “witness.” He states,
“The witness is the man who is identified with the just cause which the
crowd and the great hate and who, for this just cause, risks his life” (129).
As such, testimony is more than a narration of events; it is the engagement
of a pure heart to the death. Even in a less dramatic or somber setting,
Ricoeur points out that acts and movements of life become testimonies
to the extent that they are a living proof of an internalized conviction and
devotion to a cause. Testimony can be an action that points to or affirms
a conviction or faith outside of itself. But this meaning of the word “testi-
mony” and the judicial sense, described earlier as a statement for or against
something, are not opposed; the range of meaning joins at a fixed point:
the engagement of the witness in testimony. The nature of this engagement
is the fundamental difference between true and false witness (130).
Ricoeur builds on his semantic analysis by addressing the religious
aspect of testimony. Using a text from Isaiah, Ricoeur identifies four
characteristics of the religious meaning in the word testimony. First, as is
48 AlexAnder Struk
evident in the case of prophets, a witness is sent in order to testify of some-
thing. Second, the witness testifies about the “global meaning of human
experience,” God, and so forth. Third, “testimony is oriented toward
proclamation”—it is meant for and relevant to all people. Fourth, testimony
in a religious setting implies the “total engagement” of words and acts, even
to the extreme of martyrdom (131). Perhaps the primary difference between
the religious and the profane meaning is the sense that the testimony does
not belong to or originate with the witness: God is both the source of testi-
mony and the subject of its content (131). As scriptural examples highlight,
proclaiming to others is always more important than dying for a cause;
being a witness precedes being a martyr. Yet even in a religious context
the juridical aspect of testimony is still relevant. People of faith are called
on to testify that God is the only true and living God in a trial that God
initiates with people and their idols (132). In fact, this theme of religious
confession-profession in a trial is a characteristic of the prophetic idea of
testimony. Yet this confession of faith is only possible if united with a cer-
tain narrative kernel, a historic element. Ricoeur states, “It is not possible
to testify for a meaning without testifying that something has happened
which signifies this meaning” (133). As such, any religious witness or testi-
mony is necessarily a witness of historic signs or a narration of acts.
The characteristics of testimony shift slightly between the prophetic
discourse of the Old Testament and the evangelical discourse characterized
by the New Testament. In this setting the central aspect of testimony is con-
fession, especially that Jesus is the Christ. Though all four gospel writers
proclaim as much, Ricoeur focuses on the Gospel of John. While retaining
a narrative framework, John focuses more on confessing that Jesus is the
Christ than on a narration of events. The term “witness” is often applied
to Christ himself (136). This difference in meaning affects the way we think
about testimony. In John, “testimony” is used as a synonym for “revelation;”
the Son testifies and thereby manifests the Father: the testimony of Christ
is the exegesis of God. Testimony shifts “from confession-narration toward
manifestation itself” (137). This shift in meaning is seen in John the Baptist,
who is not an eye-witness to the resurrection or to many of Jesus’ other
miracles. John the Baptist’s testimony is the “Christic confession.” He testi-
fies that Jesus is the son of God, which witness comes from an interior sign
or signs, an interior word that says this is the Christ (138). His testimony
is a personal and internal witness. The extreme point of internalization is
testimony through the Holy Ghost, a personal witness known only to the
individual. In summary, evangelical discourse is characterized by the dual
theme of Christ as the faithful witness and of personal testimony through
a revelation of the Holy Ghost. However, such testimony does not lose all
reference to eye-witness testimony. This is because testimony is always a
the hermeneuticS of teStimony 49
testimony of something. A testimony-confession of Christ is still linked to a
narrative framework of who he was, what he did, what his works were, and
so forth. Even at an extreme point of internalization, testimony-confession
cannot be separated from testimony-narration (139).
Ricoeur also maintains that the profane sense of the word “testimony”—
an element of proof in a trial—is relevant to testimony in a religious setting.
This is represented in Christ’s ministry in general and his trial in particu-
lar, both of which present a contest between God and the world with the
advent of the Lord’s kingdom in the balance (140). Christ’s trial typifies
Ricoeur’s theology of testimony; Christ is both the faithful witness and the
emissary sent to testify to the world. Christ is the defendant in the earthly
trial but the judge in the eschatological trial (141): “The world cannot hate
you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil”
(John 7:7). It is in this judicial setting that confession- profession takes on
all the characteristics of testimony, namely con fession and attestation.
“Internal testimony of the Holy Ghost derives . . . its meaning in the strug-
gle” between the world and Christ as evidenced by the trial (Ricoeur 141).
At the human level testimony is dual, an internal testimony or conviction
from the Holy Ghost and the external testimony of works and suffering.
The trial is significant because it is at the juridical moment that testimony
as a confession of faith is tied to testimony as a narration of facts.
II. Ricoeur, Testimony, and LDS Scripture
Ricoeur finds support within the Bible for understanding testimony
as being related to the idea of a trial. However, the same principles are evi-
dent in the Book of Mormon as well. In particular, Abinadi’s prophesying
to the people of King Noah, culminating with his trial, highlights many of
the same themes and tensions that Ricoeur found in the trial of Christ and
serves to support Ricoeur’s ideas about understanding testimony in both a
semantic and religious context.
In his semantic exploration of the word “testimony,” Ricoeur states
that a testimony is primarily a story or narration of things one has both
heard and seen (123). The witness or bearer of the testimony is the author
of this narration. Furthermore, “testimony” implies a dual relationship
between the witness and those who hear and then judge whether or not
to accept the testimony. The heart of this judiciary sense of testimony is
that any testimony lends itself to the support of some statement or opin-
ion; it is a tool of judgment in a trial. These ideas lend themselves well
50 AlexAnder Struk
to the story of Abinadi. He comes among the people of King Noah1 and
prophesies to them of their wickedness and of the impending judgments of
God. In a strict sense, Abinadi and his testimony do not fit perfectly with
Ricoeur’s semantic outline, primarily because of the differences between
testimony in profane and religious discourse. For example, while Ricoeur
states that the witness is the author of the testimony, Abinadi makes it
clear that his testimony or witness comes from the Lord: “Behold, thus
saith the Lord, and thus hath he commanded me, saying, Go forth, and
say unto this people . . . except they repent I will visit them in mine anger”
(Mosiah 11:20). Nevertheless, vestiges of Ricoeur’s semantic analysis are
evident. While primarily acting as an emissary of God, Abinadi neverthe-
less includes his own observations as a member of King Noah’s kingdom.
“And now I read unto you the remainder of the commandments of God,
for I perceive that they are not written in your hearts; I perceive that ye have
studied and taught iniquity the most part of your lives” (Mosiah 13:11). His
witness is based both on a narration or history of what God has revealed
to him and what he has seen for himself. The second point Ricoeur makes
about testimony is illustrated by the dual relationship between Abinadi,
who testifies, and the people to whom he testifies. They assume the role
of the judge and must decide what to make of Abinadi’s testimony, even
before they decide what to do with his life. Abinadi’s testimony is decidedly
in support of a specific opinion or statement, namely God’s witness against
Noah and his people. Its judicial nature is highlighted by its stark contrast
to the testimony of the people, who in angry rebuttal cry, “O king, behold,
we are guiltless . . . therefore, this man has lied concerning you, and he has
prophesied in vain” (Mosiah 12:14).
While strong judicial themes are evident in the case of Abinadi, the
differences between Abinadi’s trial and Ricoeur’s ideas are mediated by
Ricoeur’s evolving semantic treatment of “testimony.” The struggle of two
parties in a judicial setting and the pitting of one’s testimony against the
other points to the importance of the reliability of the witness. The issue
of whether the witness is a false witness, defined as having a lie in one’s
heart, or a true witness, fully devoted to their cause or testimony, becomes
paramount. But in Ricoeur’s words, the possibility that a true witness, fully
devoted to his or her cause even to the point of martyrdom, “may also be
accused calls for a different analysis” (129). The idea of the faithful wit-
ness, identified with a just cause and pitted against the rest of society, more
closely resembles Abinadi’s trial. Abinadi does not argue his case against
King Noah and his people before an impartial judge. Rather, Abinadi is
1 King Noah is not to be confused with the biblical Noah. King Noah’s life is described in
Mosiah 11–19.
the hermeneuticS of teStimony 51
both the witness and the accused. By becoming a martyr, Abinadi’s trial
closely resembles the trials of both Socrates and Jesus, and fits within the
archetype that Ricoeur identifies.
Ricoeur concludes his semantic analysis by emphasizing that the
essence of a true witness is devotion to a cause, and that actions and life-
styles can be testimonies to the extent that they point to a certain conviction
(130). The fact that the witness is engaged in bearing testimony unites the
familiar judicial meanings of testimony that Ricoeur first highlights with
the internalization of testimony in the true witness. It is here where the
case of Abinadi shines. To say that Abinadi is a true witness seems almost
to understate his complete and total commitment to his testimony and mis-
sion. Abinadi is completely faithful in discharging the direction he receives
from the Lord. He boldly testifies to King Noah and his people of their
wickedness and the judgments of God, testifies to them of the Savior, and
does so with complete disregard for his own safety and life (Mosiah 13:9).
This total engagement of acts and beliefs renders his testimony potent
and sincere.
A comparison between Ricoeur’s analysis of the religious sense of
the word “testimony” and the trial of Abinadi reveals even closer parallels.
Ricoeur first identifies four characteristics of religious meaning in the word
“testimony,” each of which fits in the case of Abinadi. First of all, the
witness is sent to testify of something. As noted earlier, this marks a depar-
ture from Ricoeur’s analysis of testimony in a profane sense, in which the
witness is the author of his or her testimony. It also fits more closely with
Abinadi’s role as a prophet who is sent from God to testify (Mosiah 11:20).
The second and third characteristics of testimony in a religious discourse
refer to its cosmic scope as well as its universal relevance. Abinadi’s mes-
sage to the people of King Noah focuses on their eternal salvation, which
can only come through repentance and accepting the witness of Christ:
“I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down
among the children of men, and shall redeem his people” (Mosiah 15:1).
The fourth characteristic that Ricoeur highlights is a total engagement of
words and acts, even to the point of martyrdom. In this sense, the witness
in a religious setting is similar to the true witness that Ricoeur elaborates in
his semantic analysis. As a prophet of God, Abinadi shows complete engage-
ment to his witness when he states, “I will suffer even until death, and I
will not recall my words, and they shall stand as a testimony against you.
And if ye slay me ye will shed innocent blood, and this shall also stand as
a testimony against you at the last day” (Mosiah 17:10). Ricoeur is careful
to point out that being a witness comes before being a martyr. One is a
martyr because of one’s witness, not the other way around. This points
to the fact that the message from God is more important than the life or
52 AlexAnder Struk
death of the messenger. The trial of Abinadi dramatizes this idea by the
fact that Abinadi is given divine protection to finish his message before he
can become a martyr (Mosiah 13:2–4). His subsequent martyrdom seals his
testimony without drawing attention away from it.
Ricoeur also points out that, just as with the profane use of the term,
religious testimony is connected to a narration or history of events. There is
a “narrative kernel” to all religious testimony (133). Even at the extreme point
of internalization, as in the case of a personal witness from the Holy Ghost,
the testimony-confession of Christ is linked with a testimony- narration.
In other words, even a simple and personal witness that Jesus is the Christ
is necessarily connected with certain facts about who Christ was, what he
did, and why he is significant, as well as the historicity of that divine rev-
elation. Abinadi’s testimony is primarily a declaration of Christ’s divinity,
which is the height of testimony according to Ricoeur (134). Abinadi’s ser-
mon to King Noah and his court is significant for at least two reasons.
First of all, Abinadi’s declaration of Christ’s divinity is done within a
narrative framework that includes references to biblical laws, prophesies,
and the Plan of Salvation. Abinadi testifies of Christ’s divinity through a
lengthy narration beginning with Christ’s pre-mortal identity, extending
through his earthly ministry, atonement, and resurrection, and including a
description of what men and women must do to merit salvation (Mosiah
15–16). The nature of Abinadi’s testimony of Christ clearly demonstrates
the relationship that Ricoeur identifies between testimony-confession and
testimony-narration.
Second, the narrative structure of Abinadi’s discourse supports
Ricoeur’s idea that testimony of Christ is the height of testimony. Abinadi
begins his discourse to King Noah after claiming the right to finish his
message. He starts by questioning them on their observance of the Law of
Moses and the Ten Commandments. Abinadi then connects the Law of Moses
to Moses’ prophesies concerning the Messiah, followed by Isaiah’s more
recent Messianic prophesies. He then declares his own witness that Jesus
Christ is the Messiah and teaches them what they must do to gain salva-
tion. Abinadi begins with ideas that King Noah and his priests are most
familiar with and gradually builds up his message until he makes his point,
focusing on and ending with Christ as the Messiah. The organization of
his sermon points to Jesus Christ and his redeeming power as the most
important part of his message.
The final and perhaps the most important part of Ricoeur’s religious
analysis focuses on the judicial aspect of testimony as part of a cosmic trial
between God and the world. This idea finds its most forceful expression in
the trial of Christ. When he is brought before Pontius Pilate, Christ stands
on trial in the earthly sense. But at the same time, he is the judge of the
the hermeneuticS of teStimony 53
world in the eschatological sense, declaring that his kingdom is “not of
this world” (John 18:36). In this setting, the accused is both witness and
judge. The same tension between the world and the kingdom of God evi-
dent in Christ’s trial also exists in Abinadi’s trial. Of course, Abinadi does
not usurp Christ’s role as judge of the world, but as one of his emissaries
he speaks with the authority of one of his plenipotentiaries. His witness
and authority is divine, and he has come to testify and deliver the judg-
ment of the Lord. King Noah and his people represent the children of
God who have turned away from the covenant and embraced idol worship,
perverting the law God gave to Moses. Thus there are two trials occurring
simultaneously. In the earthly sense, Abinadi is the accused, on trial for
testifying of the wickedness of the world. He is at the mercy of the world
and faces martyrdom if he does not deny his divine witness. But in the
eschatological sense, Abinadi represents the Lord’s judgment being passed
on the people of King Noah: “Thus saith the Lord, it shall come to pass
that this generation, because of their iniquities, shall be brought into bond-
age . . .” (Mosiah 12:2). Paralleling Christ’s trial, Abinadi is put to death
for his witness against the world. But in the eschatological sense, Abinadi’s
prophesies all come to pass and the people of King Noah find their lives
dramatically disrupted by the judgments of God. The trial of Abinadi rep-
resents testimony in all its many facets, both secular and religious. It also
demonstrates how the ideas that Ricoeur develops are broadly applicable
to other instances of testimony and can deepen our understanding of the
act of testifying.
III. The Importance of Ricoeur’s Ideas
and their Implications for LDS Practice
When bearing testimony, we do not tend to think of ourselves as
witnesses in a trial, nor do we pay close attention to the semantics under-
lying our speech. Nevertheless, several of Ricoeur’s insights can lead to a
greater appreciation and understanding of what goes on when one bears
testimony. The remainder of this paper explores several implications and
personal applications of Ricoeur’s work.
During a recent session of General Conference, a biannual meeting
of the LDS church, Elder Oaks stated, “A testimony of the gospel is . . .
not a sermon. President [Spencer W.] Kimball taught that the moment
we begin preaching to others, our testimony is ended.” (26) It is clear that
as we bear testimonies to others, our role is to humbly witness of Christ’s
divinity and not to cry repentance. Yet as we look to the scriptures, it seems
as though all prophetic testimonies involve an either implicit or explicit call
54 AlexAnder Struk
to repentance. Certainly Abinadi captures this element of testimony when
he blends his witness of Christ with a powerful rebuke to King Noah’s
priests, telling them that they ought to tremble, repent of their sins, and
begin teaching the people that redemption comes through Christ (Mosiah
16:13). In what sense then is testimony a call? How can we mediate the
apparent tension between Elder Oaks’ statement and the presentation of
testimony in the scriptures? Ricoeur provides a crucial insight when he
equates the “Christic confession” with the manifestation of the Father
(137). Testifying of the divinity of Jesus Christ is an act that runs deeper
than a declaration of faith: it can lead to an experience with the divine.
Lacking divine authority, most people who bear testimony are not in the
position to lecture on repentance. Yet the call to repentance that seems
closely related to bearing witness does not originate with the person bear-
ing testimony, it is inherent in an individual’s experience of the divine. The
witness never issues the call to repentance, but this call is always present to
the extent that our testimonies are windows to Christ’s invitation to repent
and “come unto him.”
Ricoeur’s theme of a trial leads to further insights into what it means
to bear testimony. In Adam Miller’s essay “Atonement and Testimony,”
he states that every testimony is necessarily centered in the atonement of
Christ, or in other words, grounded in an experience of the redeeming
power of the atonement (2). Therefore, a testimony of anything besides the
atonement is only a testimony in a peripheral sense, much like a branch
is merely an appendage to the tree. To say one has a testimony of Joseph
Smith, the Book of Mormon, or a living prophet is really to say that one
experiences the power of the atonement through those things. This idea is
all the more significant when juxtaposed with the statement in Revelation
19:10 which says, “the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophesy.” It inti-
mates a connection between having a testimony in the religious sense and
having the spirit of prophesy. When we bear sincere testimony to others do
we become like the prophets, participating in a sort of cosmic trial witness-
ing for Christ against the world? Ricoeur would seem to believe so when
he states, “the internal testimony of the Holy Spirit derives all its meaning
in the struggle which is waged between the Christ and the world before
the court of history” (141). In a common LDS setting such as a sacrament
meeting, the bearing of testimony is usually done in a safe environment,
hardly the scene of martyrdom that accompanies Abinadi’s or Christ’s
testimonies. Nevertheless the same tension between Christ and the world
appears when we bear testimony because to bear testimony of Christ is to
participate in the great eschatological trial between Christ and the world.
In a certain sense, to bear testimony separates us from the world and pro-
fane. We are comfortable thinking that having and bearing a testimony
the hermeneuticS of teStimony 55
strengthens our relationship with God and helps us find religious truth,
but Ricoeur’s analysis implies more than that. Bearing testimony is a posi-
tive response to the cosmic question, “Who’s on the Lord’s side? Who?”
(Hymns 260) in which we not only draw closer to Christ and witness of
his divinity, but through doing so distance ourselves from the world and
become a more holy people.
Also, if we view bearing our own testimonies in the light of a
juridical moment, we realize that the two elements Ricoeur describes,
testimony-confession and testimony-narration, are present in our own tes-
timonies. Elder Dallin H. Oaks stated, “A testimony of the gospel is a
personal witness borne to our souls by the Holy Ghost that certain facts of
eternal significance are true and that we know them to be true. Such facts
include the nature of the Godhead and our relationship to its three mem-
bers, the effectiveness of the Atonement, and the reality of the Restoration”
(26). In Elder Oaks’ definition, the two elements of a Christic confession
and a narrative content are closely bound together. We engage in testi-
mony-confession when we declare our witness, borne through the revealing
power of the Holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Christ. Testimony-narration
consists of the associated narrative of how we gained that testimony and
what the significance of that testimony is. Stating that Jesus is the Christ
will always be tied into a narrative of how that Atonement cleanses us from
sin, brings about the resurrection and so forth; in Ricoeur’s words, a nar-
ration of “the acts of deliverance” (134). Distinguishing between these two
important elements helps us better understand the makeup of our own tes-
timonies. It also gives us a place to start when we seek to strengthen our
testimonies of Christ, either through seeking a stronger spiritual witness
of Christ’s divinity or through increasing our familiarity with his divine
character, perfect love, or saving grace.
Finally, through bearing testimony we participate in the Ricoeurinan
phenomenon of a “dual-trial.” Whether we testify to those without faith or
to those with a similar belief, we act as witnesses for Christ in his earthly
trial. Our testimonies become a form of evidence in the defense of Christ.
But our testimonies are also significant because they become evidence for
us when we become defendants, on trial in the eschatological sense where
our “words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall
not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this
awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God” (Alma 12:14). In the
great trial of the Final Judgment, Jesus moves from the role of accused to
the role of counselor and advocate. For those who were faithful in their
testimony of Jesus, the Lord has promised to forgive their sins and purify
them through the Atonement. Abinadi makes clear the powerful connec-
tion between bearing testimony and salvation when he states that “those
56 AlexAnder Struk
who shall declare his generation,” or in other words, bear testimony of
Christ, become numbered among “his seed” (Mosiah 15:10). “These are
they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to
redeem them from their transgressions” (Mosiah 15:12). Ricoeur may
have meant something like this when he stated that the cosmic trial of
Christ against the world is what gives meaning and significance to our per-
sonal testimonies (140–41). In Miller’s words, “to bear a testimony is to be
redeemed” (14). Clearly the importance of testimony consists not only in
its significance as a statement of shared belief or as a motivator of religious
behavior, but in the fact that the strength of our testimony and our willing-
ness to bear it becomes a factor in our salvation and a criterion that Christ
uses to judge our worthiness to enter into his glory.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Cornaby, Hannah and Henry H. Russell. “Who’s on the Lord’s Side?”
Hymns of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City,
UT: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985.
Miller, Adam. “Atonement and Testimony.” Unpublished essay.
Oaks, Dallin H. “Testimony.” Ensign (May 2008): 26–29.
Ricoeur, Paul. “The Hermeneutics of Testimony.” Esssays on Biblical
Interpretation. Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1980. 119–53.
The Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ. Salt Lake City, UT:
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1981.
The Holy Bible. Salt Lake City, UT: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, 1979.