Aporia Vol. 9, 1999
Sartre's Radicalization of
Husserlian Phenomenology
BENJAMIN TALLENT
In the introduction to Being and Nothingness, Jean Paul Sartre sets up
a critique of phenomenology, especially that of Edmund Husserl. Sartre
discusses the successes and failures of Husserl's phenomenology, and
proposes his own "phenomenological ontology" as an alternative. In
Sartre's critique, I find two major points of contention with Husserl.
Sartre is unsatisfied with Husserl's view of the subjective Kyle as contents
of consciousness, and with Husserl's attributing consciousness to a
transcendental ego (10-23).i Sartre believes that both are problems
because they attribute to consciousness an actual content or substance.
Sartre remedies the former problem by insisting that consciousness is a
nothing and has no contents. Sartre's solution to the latter problem is to
make the ego a referent constituted by way of a totality of reflected
instances of consciousness, rather than the subject of one reflective
consciousness.
The focus of this paper will be to look at how Sartre attempts to
overcome these difficulties that he finds in Husserl's phenomenology.
In turn, I will examine the notions of hyle and the transcendental ego in
Husserl's own work, and Sartre's attempts to overcome these notions. I
will then propose that Sartre's system be understood in light of the
Benjamin Tallent is a senior at the University of Tennessee. Folbwing gradua
tion in May, he intends to pursue a Ph.D. in Philosophy with an emphasis on I9th and
20th Century Continental thought.
'A more complete critique of the transcendental ego and hyle is offered in
Sartre's The Transcendence of the Ego. Although in Being and Nothingness, Sartre
prefers to talk about Husserl's notion of the "cogito," his critique remains cen
tered on Husserl's notion of consciousness as an entity.
34 BENJAMIN TALLENT
phenomenological principles set forth in the introduction to Being and
Nothingness. Through an examination of Sartre's critique of these con
cepts and his proposed solutions, 1 want to show what is involved in
Sartre's radicalization of Husserl's original phenomenological principles,
and that perhaps Sartre's system is really not as different from Husserl's
as it may seem.
Before looking at the elements of Husserl that Sartre did not like,
it is important to note two key ideas of Husserl's which Sartre uses as
jumping off points. Sartre points out one of these in the very first sentence
of Being and Nothingness: Modem thought has realized considerable
progress by reducing the existent to the series of appearances which
manifest it (3).^ Sartre speaks here of a key contribution of Husserl's
phenomenology, the elimination of a hidden metaphysical realm that
"would drain to itself all the being of the existent" (4). Husserl's model
removes the dualism of appearance and reality because appearances refer
only to the total series of appearances, and not to a hidden reality.
Things reveal themselves through appearances as what they are and do
not refer to another ontological realm (4).^
The second contribution that Sartre attributes to Husserl is his
idea of the intentionality of consciousness. Husserl presents the notion
of the intentionality of consciousness in his Ideas, Book 1. Intentionality
is an essential peculiarity of the sphere of mental processes taken uni
versally in so far as all mental processes in some manner or other share
in it (199). For Sartre, this idea, that "all consciousness is consciousness
of something"( 11) is key. As we shall later see, it is pivotal in his con
ception of consciousness as empty of all contents.
According to Sartre, this step of removing the contents of con
sciousness is not taken by Husserl. He attributes the idea to Husserl that
the hyle is some sort of real thing, a stratum or content of consciousness
(20). He bases his critique on this reading, which I consider unfair to
what Husserl meant by hyle or hyletic data. Husserl characterizes the
hyle as "sensuous mental processes" (Ideas 203-07) and suggests that the
^Henceforth, citations from Sartre will be from Being and Nothingness
unless otherwise noted.
^This is not to say that there is no being in itself. Without it, there could
be no phenomenal world for Sartre.
SARTRE'S RADICALIZATION 35
hyk is "animated" by the intentional noetic actd These "sensuous men
tal processes" are in a way taken up by the intentional act and
bestowed with meaning. The hyletic data can be construed as simply
the raw perceptual data of phenomena which must be interpreted by
the intentional act. This sensuous content "hus in itself nothing pertaining
to intentionality" (Ideas 203). But Sartre interprets Husserl to hold that
intentionality is necessary to consciousness and critiques Husserl's
notion of hyle as unfaithful to this principle. Surely the hyle cannot be
the contents of intentionality and yet have nothing pertaining to inten
tionality. Yet this is just what Sartre's critique would entail. Thus it
seems that Sartre's critique is unfair to Husserl. For Husserl the hyle is
not the contents of consciousness, but merely data which is taken up by
consciousness in its intentional perception of what is presented to it.
The hyle is the material through which consciousness bestows meaning on
the object of its intentionality.
Though it is possible that Sartre is unfair to Husserl on this issue,
the hyle as contents of consciousness remains the jumping off point for
Sartre's discussion of consciousness as nothing. This assertion is one
of the main points of Being and Nothingness and is also a major target of
criticism. Husserl's notion of the transcendental ego was also a pivotal
motivation for Sartre's making of consciousness a nothing. Sartre is
clearly more justified in his critique here, though 1 will later question
the extent to which his model is an improvement over Husserl's notion
of the ego. In his Cartesian Meditations, Husserl sets up the pure ego as
that which survives the phenomenological reduction or ettoxil (21).
The ego with its consciousness is that which the reduction reveals:
If I put myself above all this life and refrain from doing any believing
that takes "the" world straightforwardly as existing—if I direct my
regard exclusively to this life itself, as consciousness of "the"
world—I thereby acquire myself as the pure ego, with the pure
stream of my cogitationes. (21)
■•By "intentional noetic act," I simply mean the intentional act which
both Husserl and Sartre take to be constitutive of consciousness. Sartre will
later designate this act as the for-itself.
36 BENJAMIN TALLENT
The second important point regarding Husserl's notion of the ego is that
it is not of the world and is not dependent on the world for its being:
If I keep purely what comes into view—for me, the one who is
meditating—by virtue of my free epoche with respect to the being
of the experienced world, the momentous fact is that I, with my
life, remain untouched in my existential status, regardless of
whether or not the world exists and regardless of what my eventual
decision concerning its being or non-being might be. This Ego,
with his Ego-life, who necessarily remains for me, by virtue of such
epoche, is not a piece of the world.( 25)
Thus, Husserl's ego is not dependent on the world for its being. It is a
"transcendental ego" even in its ontological status.
Sartre's main problem with the Husserlian ego is that it is an entity
from which consciousness emanates. Sartre argues in The Transcendence
of the Ego that such a conception is incorrect. Once again, however, I
think that Sartre's critique may be based on an unfair reading of Husserl.
Elsewhere in the Cartesian Meditations, Husserl says that the ego lives in
my "flowing conscious life" (31; my emphasis). If the ego lives in con
sciousness or the stream of consciousness, it seems that it cannot also be
a concrete entity from which this consciousness emanates. I will later
propose the view that Sartre and Husserl may actually have very similar
conceptions of the ego. Such an argument cannot be made, however,
without an explication of Sartre's model of consciousness. Arriving at an
understanding of Sartre's model will be our next task.
The keys to understanding Sartre's "phenomenological ontology"
are set up in the introduction to Being and Nothingness. Unfortunately,
the introduction is one of the most difficult parts of the book and often
seems unrelated to the rest of the work. It is difficult to see why Sartre
began his book with this particular material. I propose a reading of
Sartre's Being and Nothingness based on the phenomenological precepts
set up in the introduction. I feel that such a reading will provide par
ticular insight into Sartre's conception of consciousness as a nothing,
while still providing a standpoint from which the remainder of the book
is understandable.
As previously stated, Sartre takes up Husserl's phenomenological
model by "reducing the existent to the series of appearances which
SARTRE S RADICALIZATION 37
manifest it." The key derivation that Sartre makes from this principal is
that a thing is the totality or sum of its "effects" (3).' Sartre continues
this theme throughout the first two sections of the introduction. He dis
cusses it in connection with his conception of essence;
We can equally well reject the dualism^ of appearance and essence.
The appearance does not hide the essence, it reveals it; it is the
essence. The essence of an existent is no longer a property sunk in
the cavity of this existent; it is the manifest law which presides over
the succession of its appearances, it is the principle of the series. (5;
my emphasis)
Thus, for Sartre, the appearance reveals itself and the essence of the
revealed thing, which is the total series of appearances. It is important
to note that Sartre does not limit these appearances to perceptual phe
nomena. It is essential to my reading of Sartre that he indicates that any
effect which occurs in the world is reducible to some sort of appearance
or series of appearances. Thus, for Sartre, even force, that of an electric
current for example, is simply the sum of its effects or appearances (3-4).
The importance of this point will become clear later when I argue that
even consciousness, which is a nothing, is in a special way an appear
ance or effect.
Thus for Sartre, a thing or existent is the sum of its appearances or
effects. Its essence is the principle of the series. In addition, the essence
itself is an appearance:
Essence, as the principle of the series, is definitely only the con
catenation of appearances; that is, itself an appearance. This
'Henceforth, when talking about a thing, I will use "effect," "appearance,"
and "phenomenon" interchangeably. I consider appearances and phenomena as
examples of effects, and I will later consider the effects of consciousness.
^The dualism to which Sartre refers is any conception in which the
phenomenal world is opposed to another ontological realm. Reality or being-in-
itself is then limited to this ontological world and the phenomenal world is
viewed as mere appearance. Sartre's point is that a phenomenological conception
removes the ontological distinction between these two realms. In Sartre's words.
38 BENJAMIN TALLENT
explains how it is possible to have an intuition of essences
The phenomenal being manifests itself; it manifests its essence as
well as its existence, and it is nothing but the well connected series
of its manifestations.( 5)
For Sartre, that a thing presents itself, that is, that an appearance is
made, also implies that there is something else to which it appears. Thus
he refers to a phenomenon as a "relative-absolute." It is absolute because
it has its own being and relative because the thing is dependent upon
consciousness in order to reveal itself as a phenomenon "being in-itself
gjves itself and raises itself in relief on the ground oft his nothing"( 248).^This some
thing to which phenomena are revealed is consciousness, which Sartre refers
to as being for- itself, or simply the for-itself. This dependence of phenomena
on a consciousness is the source of Sartre's conception of the infinite:
The existent in fact can not be reduced to a finite series of
manifestations since each one of them is a relation to a subject
constantly changing. Although an object^ may disclose itself only
through a single Abschattung,^ the sole fact of there being a subject
implies the possibility of multiplying the points of view on that
"the appearance becomes full positivity; its essence is an 'appearing' which is no
longer opposed to being but on the contrary is the measure of it. For the being
of an existent is exactly what it appears. Thus we arrive at the idea of the p/ie-
nomenon such as we can find, for example, in the 'phenomenology' of Husserl or
of Heidegger" (4).
'The nothing to which Sartre refers here is the for-itself, consciousness.
We shall soon see what is meant by calling consciousness a nothing.
®Here 1 take Sartre to mean anything capable of being an object, includ
ing things which are also subjects.
'According to Hazel E. Barnes, the translator of Being and Nothingness,
Sartre means by Abschattung an appearance of an object taken as a profile (799).
Such a profile would be an abstraction since the successive appearances of an
object occur in continual flux. Sartre feels quite comfortable, however, in talking
about appearances as finite, and it will be necessary for our purposes to follow
his lead. The possibility that there is really nothing finite and therefore no dis
tinction is a subject best left for another time.
SARTRE S RADICALIZATION 39
Abschattung. This suffices to multiply to infinity the Abschattung
under consideration. Furthermore if the series of appearances were
finite, that would mean that the first appearances do not have the
possibility of reappearing, which is absurd, or that they can be all
given at once, which is still more absurd.'"( 5)
Thus, when a phenomenon is perceived, it is only a finite manifestation
of the infinite essence of the existing thing.
There is another sense in which the distinction between infinite
and finite is made. If considered temporally, the set of past appearances
and interpretations of those appearances make up a finite totality. In this
sense, at any given moment, the essence of the thing can be considered
finite. However, the essence includes all of the future appearances and
interpretations of appearances as well. In fact, the essence must be
understood as infinite because these future appearances of the thing
consist in an infinite set of possibilities.
We have seen the role of consciousness in this "phenomenological
ontology"; it has the role of that to which things present themselves."
Having set up the general system in which consciousness serves this
purpose, I may now discuss Sartre's insistence that consciousness is a
nothing. Intuitively, it seems difficult to accept this insistence as any
thing sensible. However, 1 want to argue that, if read within the broad
context of Sartre's phenomenological principle, it is more plausible than
it might seem. I will distinguish three ways in which consciousness can
be understood as a nothing. However, these three ways are separated
only for the sake of clarification and are really abstractions from a
holistic consideration of consciousness as a nothing. The first two dis
tinctions I will make are set out clearly in the text. The third should
be seen to follow from the phenomenological system already dis
cussed.
'"This is not necessarily a contradiction with Sartre's earlier statement
that the essence of a thing (which is infinite) is an appearance. In that case, I
think he means that the essence is intuited from the appearances and is not an
appearance in the usual sense, that is, apprehended all at once.
"Sartre prefers to speak of consciousness as being "present" to the world,
rather than the world being "present" to consciousness.
40 BENJAMIN TALLENT
The first way in which consciousness is a nothing is discussed in
the introduction to Being and Nothingness and in the Transcendence of the
Ego. Consciousness for Sartre is always pre-reflectively self-conscious. It
is conscious of itself as a consciousness, yet it does not take itself as an
object. Sartre's says;
Every positional consciousness of an object is at the same time a
non-positional consciousness of itself. (Nothingness 13)
The existence of consciousness is an absolute because consciousness
is consciousness of itself. This is to say that the type of existence of
consciousness is to be consciousness of itself. And consciousness is
aware of itself in so far as it is consciousness of a transcendent object.
We should add that this consciousness...is not positional, which is to
say that consciousness is not for itself its own object. Its object is by
nature outside of it, and that is why consciousness posits and grasps
the object in the same act. (Transcendence 40—41)
Sartre has two things in mind here. First, consciousness is only pre-
reflectively self-conscious in relation to its object. 1 take this to mean
that its self-consciousness is derivative from its recognition of an object
as transcendent. Consciousness recognizes its objects as "not itself and
through nothing other than this very recognition is consciousness of
itself. Secondly, consciousness is not an added existent. This point is
more closely related to our concerns. Consider the human being: It is a
thing. Thus for Sartre, it is nothing but the sum of its appearances or
effects. Consciousness is a nothing in that it adds no new being-in-itself
to the appearances of the existing human being. The appearances of
the human being are somehow pre-reflectively conscious of them
selves. Thus there simply is an appearance, but it has something
added. For Sartre, that something is consciousness, which is really a
nothing.
'^The philosophical concept of substance might be helpful in under
standing this concept. Consciousness adds no new substance to the world, such
as the Cartesian consciousness would. There is no mental substance added by
SARTRE'S RADICALIZATION 41
The second sense in which consciousness is a nothing is related to
Sartre's conception of consciousness as a transcendence of facticity.
Consciousness is a pure action. Thus it is a nothing in the sense that it is
not an existent thing but an occurrence, a movement. In addition, con
sciousness as an action is always a projection toward the future; it is a
transcendence of facticity. I take facticity to consist in the finite series of
past appearances and past interpretations of appearances of the human
being. As discussed above, essences of things are infinite, but the series of
their past appearances and the past interpretations of these appearances
can be seen in a way as finite. Consciousness is a transcendence of this
facticity because it is always a moving beyond this finite series toward the
further constitution of the infinite essence. In this sense, each new
appearance is a sort of transcendence of the past. Since, as we have seen,
consciousness is nothing but the pre-reflective consciousness of self which
an appearance of a human being has, consciousness participates in this
level of transcendence. Consciousness is also a transcendence in the
sense that it is not the appearance, but the appearance's consciousness of
itself.
The third way in which consciousness is a nothing is closely
related to the first two, but is not as obvious from the text. It follows from
the phenomenological precepts that Sartre sets up in the introduction to
Being and Nothingness. To understand what Sartre means by consciousness
as a nothing, we must ask what he considers a thing. As we saw in our pre
vious examinations, a thing for Sartre is the sum of its effects.
Consciousness is not a sum of effects in the usual sense, but a pre-reflective
consciousness which an effect of a human being has of itself. Thus, neither
the appearance (effect) nor consciousness is a thing. The appearances
make up the human being as a thing, and consciousness is the self-
consciousness of these appearances. In a sense, consciousness is appearance
(17). 1 shall examine this idea shortly in my discussion of reflection.
consciousness. Note that my uses of "the existing human being" are meant to
show that a human being is a thing in the world, which, like other things,
reveals itself through appearances. Consider the phenomenal world "objective
ly." The appearances of the human being have effects both in the world for that
human being and in the world for others. I consider consciousness to be mere
ly the self-consciousness of these appearances or effects.
42 BENJAMIN TAIXENT
It can now be seen how it is that Sartre considers consciousness a
nothing. Admittedly, separating these three aspects is an abstraction, as
is shown by the degree of overlap among them. If these three explana
tions are considered as a totality, the full meaning of Sartre's conception
can he seen. All of the aspects of consciousness as a nothing can he
viewed if they are considered in light of his phenomenological princi
ples. 1 will now consider reflection and how it is that consciousness is a
type of appearance. Here 1 hope to bring hack Husserl's notion of the ego
and propose that it is really not very different from Sartre's ego.
Sartre uses two French terms which are rendered as "reflection" in
English. This is important to note because there is a key distinction
between the two (see note below). For Sartre, the for-itself exists as a
"reflection-reflecting" (213-14). In being consciousness of an object,
the for-itself is both a reflection and a reflecting (240—41)." Here 1
understand Sartre to mean that 1) the object is reflected through the
consciousness of it, and 2) the consciousness is reflected in the phe
nomenal world through its being consciousness of an object in that
world. Thus, through this reflection," consciousness too can he seen as
being an effect or an "appearance" in the phenomenal world, and there
by a possible object of consciousness. It is here that the second use of
reflection emerges (214). By taking the noematic reflection of a con
sciousness as an object, consciousness can in a way "reflect" on itself.
Consciousness "reflects" on its particular "appearances" in the phenom
enal world, the "reflections" (reflet) of consciousness in the world. In
addition, consciousness can reflect on the past of appearances of the
human being to which it belongs, its facticity. The fact that each of
these appearances was pre-reflectively conscious of itself shows how it is
that consciousness is also reflecting on consciousness in a way. It is
""Reflection" here, according to Bames, is a rendering of the French
term reflet. It is to be distinguished from reflexion, which refers to "the attempt
of consciousness to become its own object"(Nothingness 806). The first term
corresponds well to the English use of "reflection" as in reflection in a mirror.
The second term is closer to the usual philosophical use of "reflection."
"Henceforth 1 shall refer to consciousness' reflection in the phenomenal
world as the noematic reflection of consciousness. The noema is the object side
of intentionality in Husserl's phenomenology.
SARTRE'S RADICALIZATION 43
important to note that consciousness can thus gain access to the "essence"
of the human being. However, this "essence" will only be the facticity of
which consciousness is a transcendence, since it is only a finite number of
past consciousnesses which can become an object in this way. Thus it can
be seen how consciousness can recognize that it is not its facticity. It is not
this finite series of which it has become conscious, it is always a moving
beyond this series toward the future, with its infinite possibilities.
It must be noted that there is another aspect of facticity: the part
of facticity which is made up of the past noematic reflections of con
sciousnesses, the "effects" of these consciousnesses. But what is this part
of facticity? It seems to me that this is exactly what Sartre calls the ego.
Thus, it can be seen how the ego is a constituted, ttanscendent object
for consciousness, which was Sartre's intended conclusion in The
Transcendence of the Ego:
We are going to try to show that this ego .. . constitutes the ideal
and indirect (noematic) unity of the infinite" series of our reflect
ed consciousnesses. (60)
Thus the ego is a constituted object for Sartre. He intends this to be in
strict opposition to Husserl. However, I believe that Husserl may have
had a similar structure in mind for his ego. In the Cartesian Meditations,
Husserl says that;
The ego is himself existent for himself in continuous evidence; thus,
in himself, he is continuously constituting himself as existing. The ego
grasps himself not only as a flowing life but also as I, who live through
this and that cogito, as the same I. Now we encounter ... a second
kind of synthesis, which embraces all the particular multiplicities of
"It is constituted as an infinite unity because future noematic reflections
of consciousness will be included in this unity. The object from which this infi
nite essence is intuited is the finite series, the facticity. Similar instances occur
throughout Sartre's early works. It must be kept in mind that appearances are
always presented and finite; essences are always intuited and infinite. The key
distinction I want to make here is between a finite set of appearances, which is
the facticity, and the infinite set, which is the essence.
44 BENJAMIN TALLENT
cogitationes collectively and in its own manner, namely as
belonging to the identical Ego, who, as the active and affected sub
ject of consciousness, lives in all processes of consciousness and is
related, through them, to all ohject-poles.
But it is to be noted that this centering Ego is not an
empty pole of identity, any more than any object is such. Rather,
according to a law of "transcendental generation," with every act
emanating from him and having a new objective sense, he acquires
a neie abiding property. Since, by his own active generating, the Ego
constitutes himself as identical substrate of Ego- properties, he consti
tutes himself also as a "fixed and abiding" personal Ego.( 66—67)
I think that it can be seen in this passage that Husserl clearly has
in mind some sort of ego constitution. There are clearly two different
uses of the term ego here (note that even the translator makes a dis
tinction between ego and Ego). The first use of the term seems as if it
could be substituted for by Sartre's for-itself.'® This ego constitutes
himself through a synthesis as an identical Ego. However, at the begin
ning of chapter 32, acts emanate from this Ego, and later, this Ego
"constitutes himself." This part of the passage suggests that the Ego,
which seemed to be constituted by an instance of consciousness, is actu
ally a thing from which acts of consciousness emanate, and constitutes
himself. This shift clearly damages my position on what Husserl had in
mind. I want to say that the first problem can be resolved by under
standing Husserl's Ego as similar to Sartre's. That is, as a finite set of past
"appearances" of consciousness. With such an interpretation, Husserl's
assertion that "with every act emanating from him and having a new
objective sense, he acquires a new abiding property" could be seen as
quite similar to the way in which each instance of consciousness, as
an effect, adds concretely to the facticity of future reflecting con
sciousnesses. As to the latter problem, I am inclined to say that Husserl
'^Sartre says, "there is not one of my consciousnesses which I do not
apprehend as provided with an 1" (Transcendence 44). Thus had Sartre read
Husserl in this way, he might have been more sympathetic to Husserl's system.
SARTRE'S RADICALIZATION 45
inclined to say that Husserl meant that the "ego" does the constituting,
rather than the "Ego."" This is of course conjecture, and it is quite a
stretch to attempt to attribute Sartre's system to Husserl. However, I
think that Husserl was thinking similarly to Sartre, at least as a possibility.
In addition, it seems to me that Husserl was sufficiently ambiguous on
this subject to warrant a question as to the fairness of Sartre's critique.
In any event, the idea that Sartre's "phenomenological ontology"
in Being and Nothingness radicalizes Husserl's phenomenology by includ
ing consciousness in the world of appearance is not dependent on any
foreshadowing in Husserl of Sartre's view of consciousness. This idea, 1
hope, has been made sufficiently clear. We have seen that a close read
ing of the introduction to Being and Nothingness reveals a radicalization
of Husserl's phenomenology which provides a reasonable standpoint
from which to read the remainder of the book. The reading of Sartre
which 1 have proposed explains why Sartre included this particular
material in an introduction. The subtitle of the book: A
Phenomenological Essay on Ontology indicates that Sartre intends a sys
tem deeply rooted in phenomenology, and his liberal citation of Husserl
shows his deep indebtedness to his ptedecessor. In addition to these fac
tors, 1 believe that the more Husserlian reading which 1 have proposed
makes many of the highly controversial views in Being and Nothingness
more plausible. The book maintains its radical nature, but most of its
claims seem more sensible if viewed from this perspective. Many of
Sartre's views in Being and Nothingness have in the past been easy targets
for criticism, and many have seemed completely absurd to some readers.
1 believe that the reading 1 have proposed will not only make the book
easier to understand, but will also enable more of the book's claims to be
taken seriously.
"Husserl's retum to the distinction between "ego" and "Ego" in subse
quent sections is the motivation for this hypothesis.
46 BENJAMIN TALLENT
Works Cited
Husserl, Edmund Cartesian Meditations An Introduction to
Phenomenology Trans Dorion Cannes The Hague Martinus Nijhoff,
1960
Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy Trans F Kersten The Hague Martinus Nijhoff, 1982
Sartre, Jean-Paul Being and Nothingness Trans Hazel E Barnes New
York Washington Square Press, 1969
The Transcendence of the Ego An Existentialist Theory of
Consaousness Trans F Williams and R Kirkpatrick New York The
Noonday Press 1959