Aporia vol. 19 no. 1—2009
The Value of Unrealized Possibilities
Landes TayLor
In “Why Abortion is Immoral,” Don Marquis argues that a sufficient
condition for the wrongness of killing an adult is the victim’s loss
of a valuable future like ours. Our future is valuable because it is full
of valuable possibilities. Because the wrongness of killing an adult is due
to the privation of future possibilities, and fetuses have future possibili-
ties, Marquis concludes that killing a fetus is comparably wrong. In this
paper I will consider three objections to this account that concern a thing’s
relation to its future. Peter McInerney contends that due to an adult’s sen-
tience he has a stronger relation to his future than a fetus has, so a fetus
cannot truly possess a future like ours. Similarly, Robert Lovering argues that
futures are valuable only insofar as psychologically continuous persons
experience them. Because early fetuses are not psychologically continuous,
their futures are not valuable. Finally, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong argues
that Marquis equivocates in his meaning of “loss.” “Loss” means either the
privation of a future to which the victim has a moral right or the priva-
tion of a future to which the victim has no moral right. If the former
defini tion of “loss” is accepted, Marquis must also explain how a fetus has
a moral right to the means of realizing its future for his future-like-ours
argument to be sound.
I will argue that the future-like-ours account correctly recognizes the
value of future possibilities and the immorality of depriving another of
these possibilities, even those possibilities that would not otherwise be real-
ized. Although each being will realize only one future, the wide array of
future possibilities it has prior to its one future obtaining are nonetheless
valuable. I will begin by summarizing Marquis’ future-like-ours account
Landes Taylor is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University.
His primary academic interests include philosophy of law, applied ethics, and philoso-
phy of science. He plans to pursue a J.D. after graduation. This essay took second
place in the 2009 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Contest.
26 Landes TayLor
of the wrongness of killing and the replies of McInerney, Lovering, and
Sinnott-Armstrong.
Marquis argues that his future-like-ours account is the best explana-
tion of the wrongness of killing. He suggests that killing a person is wrong
not primarily because of its effects on the killer or on the friends and family
of the killed but rather because of its effects on the victim. Killing deprives
the victim of more than any other crime does, because it deprives him of all
his future possible experiences (Marquis 189). This loss of future possibili-
ties is so great that inflicting it is almost always a prima facie wrong.
Marquis demonstrates the strength of this argument through several
examples in which the wrongness of killing cannot be established firmly
on other common bases. First, if the wrongness of killing were due to the
victim’s humanity, it would not be wrong to kill basically human-like extra-
terrestrials, were we to find them. But on Marquis’ account, if the aliens had
valuable future possibilities like our own and the possession of such pos-
sibilities entailed the immorality of killing, it would be wrong to kill them.
This coincides with common intuition. Second, insofar as other animals
may have valuable future possibilities, we could explain the impermissibil-
ity of killing them despite their lack of personhood. Third, euthanasia may
be permissible when it is determined that the patient’s future possibilities
have little value. If a person in extreme pain without hope of recovery pre-
fers death to endless suffering, she could be killed without violating her
right to life. And yet, if the wrongness in killing were due to her humanity,
then she could not be killed, which seems intuitively unjust. Finally, the
future-like-ours theory straightforwardly applies to babies and little children
because they clearly have future possibilities to lose. Arguments which con-
tend that killing humans is wrong because they are thinking, rational beings
leave out the young and innocently ignorant, even though killing a small
child is a prima facie wrong. Because the future-like-ours explanation of the
wrongness of killing coincides so well to common moral intuitions in these
fringe cases, it has a breadth of application and relevance not found in
other theories. Given that the future-like-ours account is preferable to the
personhood, biological humanity, or sentience accounts, Marquis makes
an implicit inference to the best explanation in favor of the future-like-
ours account.
Marquis defends his account from several possible attacks. First, one
might argue that a fetus cannot value its own future, so its future’s value is
dubious. This argument assumes that value is subjective. Marquis replies that
although many do not value their own lives, such as people who are suicidal,
their lives clearly have unrecognized value. This shows that the value of a life
and its future possibilities does not depend solely on the person’s recogniz-
ing it. Thus, a fetus does not need to recognize the value of its future for
The VaLue of unreaLized PossibiLiTies 27
that future to have value. Second, if a person cannot care about something,
then he has no right to that thing. This argument concludes that because a
fetus cannot care about its own life, it has no right to live. Marquis offers the
counterexample of a patient who has the right to have his insurance com-
pany pay for a medical procedure despite his incapability of under standing
it. Similarly, a fetus’s inability to care about its life does not negate its right
to life. The final argument is that a fetus cannot be a victim because a fetus
lacks sentience. This argument fails because the future-like-ours theory bases
the wrongness of killing on the privation of a future, not on a victim’s sen-
tience. Although the fetus lacks sentience, its future possibilities include a
fully rational and thoughtful existence. Such a future is clearly valuable, so
the fetus should not be killed. Against all of these arguments, the future-
like-ours account still explains the impermissibility of abortion.
Of course, Marquis does not address every possible objection to his
theory, and since the publication of his essay, a number of objections have
been presented. For example, McInerney replies that our relation to our
future is more complex and problematic than Marquis’ account assumes.
Marquis’ account assumes that we already possess our future in some way.
But in what way and to what degree can anything already possess its future?
If a person does not significantly possess his future, then he suffers no
privation by its supposed loss. So in order for abortion to be immoral, the
fetus must already at that time possess its valuable future (McInerney 265).
Without ownership of its future, it has nothing to lose.
The relation between any person and her past and future stages is a
difficult subject for philosophical investigation. McInerney addresses three
common explanations of the continuity of personal identity and argues that
these explanations entail that a fetus’s relation to its future differs from an
adult’s. First, continuity of personal identity is based on memory. A per-
son that remembers her past actions is a “later stage” of the same person
that performed those actions. Similarly, the future person stage that will
remember what the person is currently doing is “her future” (McInerney
265). This continuity of memory establishes continuity of identity. Early
fetuses do not have developed memories of past experiences, so they do not
have continuity of identity. Second, a continuity of character establishes
continuity of identity. McInerney explains, “Continuity of character is that
in which later person stages either have a character similar to the earlier
person stages or are different in ways that are explicable by the operation
of normal causes” (McInerney 266). A fetus does not have a character or
personality in the normal sense. A fetus does not have integrity, fortitude,
virtue, courage, or any other such character traits. This lack of character
traits precludes a continuity of personal identity. Third, McInerney explains
continuity of identity by the relation of intention to action. An earlier
28 Landes TayLor
person stage intends an action that the later person stage performs. A fetus
does not deliberate or act intentionally, so it cannot have that relation to
its future person stage. Thus, McInerney argues that although adults have
meaningful relations to their futures, fetuses do not. Consequently, abor-
tion is not immoral because the fetus cannot be deprived of a future that it
does not already have.
Like McInerney, Lovering also argues that fetuses do not have the
same relation to their futures as adults do. When we say that we have a
future, the word have is ambiguous. Lovering offers four common mean-
ings of have (Lovering 134). First, to have is to possess, such as to have money
or a car. Second, to have is to experience, such as to have a headache or a
dream. Third, to have is to be disposed to exercise a moral trait, such as to
have patience or integrity. Fourth, to have is to be in a certain sort of relation,
such as to have a sister or an employee. Which of these meanings corre-
sponds to our having a future? To have a future cannot mean to possess
a future because the future is not property. To have a future cannot mean
to experience it because we cannot experience the future until it becomes
the present (when it is no longer the future). To have a future is clearly not
a moral disposition. Lovering concludes that to have a future is to be in a
certain sort of relation to it: one of continuous consciousness. Similarly to
McInerney, Lovering considers this continuity of consciousness necessary
for the continuity of identity. Early fetuses do not have continuous con-
sciousness, so they do not have the same relation to their futures as we do.
Because fetuses do not have a future like ours, Marquis’ account does not
entail the immorality of abortion.
Walter Sinnott-Armstrong also considers the meaning of having and
losing a future. But unlike Lovering, Sinnott-Armstrong does not argue
that one must already possess something in order to suffer injustice by
its loss. He defines a loss as a case in which “(i) the agent does the act, (ii) the
loser does not gain or keep the valuable thing, (iii) the loser would gain or
keep the valuable thing if the agent did not do the act” (Sinnott-Armstrong
62). This clearly includes the loss of a valuable future caused by murder,
assuming that the person would not otherwise have died at that moment.
Sinnott-Armstrong makes a further distinction between “moral
losses” and “neutral losses.” With a moral loss, the loser has a moral right
to the means of obtaining what he lost, while the agent does not. With a
neutral loss, the loser has no moral right to the means of obtaining what
he lost (62). To illustrate the distinction, Sinnott-Armstrong considers a
race between Kristin and Lee. Kristin wins the race and thus causes Lee the
loss of a valuable trophy. But this loss is neutral rather than moral because
Lee has no moral right to the means of obtaining the trophy. He has no
more of a moral right to win the race than Kristin does. Although Kristin
The VaLue of unreaLized PossibiLiTies 29
causes Lee a loss, we don’t feel that she does anything wrong by winning
the race. This example shows that it is not wrong to inflict a neutral loss
on someone. Unless someone has a moral right to the means of obtaining
what he loses, it may be permissible to deprive him of it. “To cause a moral
loss is to violate the loser’s moral right when the agent has no moral right
to do so” (63). This compels us to decide if a fetus has a moral right to the
means of sustaining its life. A fetus needs to reside in a womb to live, but
does it have a moral right to use the pregnant woman’s body? Marquis’
goal in his future-like-ours account is to sidestep the issue of fetuses’ rights
versus women’s rights. Sinnott-Armstrong concludes that Marquis’ future-
like-ours account does not successfully avoid this rights debate because it
entails the immorality of abortion only if the fetus has a moral right to use
the woman’s body.
McInerney, Lovering, and Sinnott-Armstrong all offer different views
on the nature and value of our relation to our future. The former two
argue that a person must have psychological continuity to have a valuable,
meaningful future. Otherwise, the person does not “have” her future and
cannot lose it. Sinnott-Armstrong suggests that even the privation of the
means of obtaining a future state is a loss, although the person does not yet
“have” her future. I argue that the current relation one has to one’s future is
less morally relevant than the diverse possible futures of which one may be
deprived. Possible futures have value independently of which one actu-
ally obtains. Because possible futures are valuable, any inflicted loss of
them is significant.
An epistemic problem of Marquis’ future-like-ours account is that we
cannot know in advance if an actual future will be valuable. This is espe-
cially the case with fetuses. Even if the fetus does have one specific future
(which McInerney rejects) we have no way of knowing its value. Perhaps
the fetus would not survive birth. Or perhaps the fetus’s life would consist
of nothing but misery and suffering. Or perhaps the fetus would grow up
to be the next Einstein or Mozart or Hitler. Our ignorance of its future
should make us hesitate before limiting its possibilities. I argue that depriv-
ing a person of future possibilities is just as immoral as depriving him of
future actualities.
The harm that may result from an action sufficiently establishes its
immorality. Let us consider two scenarios: (1) I go to dinner at my profes-
sor’s house, play with matches carelessly, and burn down his house, or (2)
I go to dinner at my professor’s house, play with matches carelessly, and do
not damage his property. In both cases, my carelessness shows disregard
for the safety and security of my professor’s family and property. This is
immoral regardless of the result, simply because of the possibilities of harm
which I introduce.
30 Landes TayLor
Many laws are based on the assumption that it is immoral to increase
risk. A few months ago a police officer cited my friend for driving 107
miles per hour. Excessive speeding is illegal because it increases the prob-
ability of accidents, which can cause loss of property or life. My friend has
never caused a car accident. More importantly, his driving 107 miles per
hour that sunny day did not cause a car accident. No victim suffered any
loss of property or life. My friend was outraged that he was punished for
increasing the probability of an adverse event that did not actually obtain,
but our legal system accepts that his speeding was wrong despite the lack
of loss to a victim. In our current legal system, the increased probability of
negative effects sufficiently justifies an action’s illegality. If abortion at least
increases the probability of negatively affecting the fetus’s future possibili-
ties, its illegality can be justified.
Now let us consider a hermit living autonomously on a farm in a
remote wilderness. He grows his own food and makes his own clothes.
He has no contact with the outside world and has sworn that he will never
again leave his farm for any reason. Let us assume that his true future is that
he never leaves his farm until his death; that is what he actually does regard-
less of external influences. I decide to construct a 40-foot-tall concrete wall
around the perimeter of his farm, thereby preventing his possible escape.
This seems intuitively unkind and immoral, although I only deprive him of
his unrealized possibilities. I only prevent him from doing what he would
not do. Remember, in this case his real future does not involve his escape.
Nonetheless, his leaving the farm would always be possible were it not for
my building the wall. My depriving him of his possibilities is immoral, even
if he would never realize those possibilities.
Further, let us consider the case of a paraplegic with virtually no
chance of recovering use of his lower half. I break into his house one night,
find a hacksaw in his garage, and chop off both of his legs. It may be that
medical breakthroughs in his lifetime would have enabled the paraplegic
to walk again had I not amputated his legs. Even if such medical break-
throughs do not occur in his lifetime, my actions are clearly immoral. At
least in part, the immorality of amputating his legs is due to the remote
possibility of his walking again. In all of these examples, depriving another
person of valuable possibilities is immoral (and justifiably illegal), even if
those possibilities would not have otherwise been realized.
This understanding of the value of unrealized possibilities resolves
many of the complaints we have considered. For example, Lovering argues
that psychological continuity is necessary to have a valuable future.
But the mere possibility of future psychological continuity is valuable in
itself. Even if a fetus does not yet have psychological continuity, it surely
has the potential to develop it in the future. Depriving the fetus of this
The VaLue of unreaLized PossibiLiTies 31
valuable future possibility is immoral. McInerney argues that fetuses can-
not have continuity of personal identity because they do not have character
traits, memories, or intentions. But an early fetus also has the possibility of
developing valuable character traits, forming joyous memories, and acting
on well-conceived intentions in the future. Even if the fetus’s psychological
connection to its future may be dubious, the fact that the fetus may realize
valuable possibilities in the future is obvious. Sinnott-Armstrong argues
that depriving someone of the means to realize her future is immoral only
if she has a clear moral right to those means and the agent who causes
the loss does not. But even if a fetus does not yet have the moral right to the
means of sustaining its life, it surely has the possibility of possessing such
a right in the future. The possession of moral rights is valuable, so the pos-
sibility of possessing them in the future is valuable as well. In all of these
cases, one cannot get around the fact that the fetus has valuable future
possibilities of which it would be deprived if it were aborted. Such a depri-
vation of valuable possibilities is immoral, so abortion is immoral.
Even though we cannot establish that a fetus has a clear relation to
its actual future (as McInerney contends), a fetus clearly has a wide variety
of possible futures. The fetus does not need to already possess a specific
future in order to suffer a loss from abortion. The loss of possibilities is
significant regardless of which specific future would have otherwise been
realized. Depriving another of an array of possibilities is at least as immoral
as depriving him of a specific future. Because abortion deprives a fetus of
all of its possibilities, its immorality is comparable to that of depriving an
adult of his possibilities by murdering him.
Works Cited
Lovering, Robert P. “Does a Normal Foetus Really Have a Future of Value?
A Reply to Marquis.” Bioethics 19 (2005): 131–45.
Marquis, Don. “Why Abortion is Immoral.” The Journal of Philosophy 86.4
(1971): 183–202.
McInerney, Peter. “Does a Fetus Already have a Future-Like-Ours?” The
Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990): 264–68.
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter. “You Can’t Lose What You Ain’t Never Had: A
Reply to Marquis on Abortion.” Philosophical Studies: An International
Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition 96 (1999): 59–72.
Works Consulted
Brill, H. Skott. “The future-like-ours argument, personal identity, and the
twinning dilemma.” Social Theory and Practice 29 (2003): 419–30.
Conee, Earl. “Metaphysics and the Morality of Abortion.” Mind 108 (1999):
619–46.
Cudd, Ann. “Sensationalized Philosophy: A Reply to Marquis’s ‘Why
Abortion is Immoral.’” The Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990): 262–64.
Kuflik, A. “The ‘future like ours’ argument and human embryonic stem
cell research.” Journal of Medical Ethics 34 (2008): 417–21.
Norcross, Alastair. “Killing, Abortion, and Contraception: A Reply to
Marquis.” The Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990): 268–77.