Aporiavol. 16 no. 2—2006
Free Will in War and Peace
NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
I
n the next to last paragraph of War and PeaceLeo Tolstoy makes the fol-
lowing rhetorical statement, "true, we are not conscious of our depend-
ence but if we were to allow that we are free we arrive at an absurdity,
whereas by admitting our dependence on the external world, on time and
on causality we arrive at laws" (1444).1The statement is a relatively straight-
forward summary of a reductio ad absurdumargument graciously given to us
by the author himself. Yet, given the sheer breadth of the work, a very nat-
ural question to ask is whether this summary is fair. And more importantly
does the argument from reductiowork as prescribed? On the one hand, it is
the author himself who summarizes the argument. So, at the very least,
Tolstoy intended to demonstrate that assuming the existence of freewill
leads to an absurd conclusion, and that the opposite assumption must be
true—that we are governed by deterministic laws. On the other hand, if one
assumes that the reductioargument is a central argument of the text, then
surely many more assumptions, postulates, and side arguments went into
this larger argument than just those regarding freewill. If so, then any one
of these assumptions might as well have been the source of the 'absurd con-
clusion'. Hence, we come to the second part of the problem: does Tolstoy's
reductio argument actually demonstrate that an assumption of freewill is
erroneous? The intention of the present essay is to argue for a negative
response to this question, and to show that rejecting another of Tolstoy's
latent assumptions circumvents the 'absurd conclusion'. Moreover, it is
1 This book will be cited simply by the page number.
Nickolay Tugushev is a philosophy student at Temple University. Upon graduation
he plans to graduate school in philosophy.
14 NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
actually this other assumption that leads Tolstoy to reject freewill and
embrace determinism throughout War and Peace.
The presupposition responsible for Tolstoy's erroneous conclusion
must have been so fundamental to his thinking that doubting it was for
him impossible. Otherwise, it would be necessary to challenge his reason-
ing and competence as a thinker. This course, besides being overly ambi-
tious, would most likely fail. Instead, it will be fruitful to investigate the
concerns that drive Tolstoy's inquiry and to uncover features of the para-
digm from which these concerns arise.
In the explicitly philosophical portions of War and Peace, Tolstoy
inquires into the unfolding of history and criticizes contemporary histori-
ans. With regard to the War of 1812 he asks, "What brought about this
extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes?" (715); and similarly with
respect to the Battle of Borodino Tolstoy asks, "Why was the battle of
Borodino fought?" (895). In the epilogue Tolstoy arrives at the conclusion
that certain laws govern behavior of masses of people. Whether these laws
are known or even knowable are legitimate questions for Tolstoy, questions
that he addresses at different parts of the novel (1168). However, at this
point, it is more important to examine the framework required to pose
these questions of 'causes' in the way that he does. Whether the answers to
these questions are the sums of infinitely many causes, laws governing
human history, or the one cause responsible for reality as such, each ques-
tion presupposes an answer that simply exists out there in the world. Thus,
for Tolstoy, there is some actual cause or law or reason responsible for the
War of 1812. Whatever Tolstoy's answer is, its correctness or incorrectness
is a function of the actual state of affairs in reality.
Such a paradigm of thought might be considered a truism, one from
which the very act of questioning arises. Hence it may be argued that
Tolstoy is not only justified in adopting this axiomatic stance, but rather
that he could not avoid adopting it same as anyone else. Yet for Tolstoy,
postulating a reality that exists in a specific state in its entirety is not merely
a prerequisite for inquiry, but moreover it is a direct source of some of his
conclusions. As when he states:
FREEWILLINWARANDPEACE 15
The problem lies in the fact that if we regard man as a subject
for observation from whatever point of view -theological, his-
torical, ethical or philosophic- we find the universal law of
necessity to which he (like everything else that exists) is subject.
But looking upon man from within ourselves -man as the
object of our own inner consciousness of self -we feel ourselves
to be free (1427).
Tolstoy seems to regard it possible to refer to the entirety of what
exists and to make generalizations about the whole of reality. Further, he
must think that there is something like an actual state of all existent things
at any given time—a totality of being. These two axioms are interdependent
and imply much more than the mere statement that one can be correct or
incorrect about the state of affairs in the world outside one's body. It is as
if one could clearly inscribe within a boundary the set of 'all existent
things'. Otherwise, without this kind of boundary, referring to reality as
such—in its entirety—seems difficult to comprehend. As when one refers to
the 'set of all tulips' one has in mind a criterion for discriminating between
these particular flowers and everything else that isn't a tulip. In that case,
the criterion itself does meaningful work. However, the set of 'all existent
things' is a special referent to say the least, primarily because it is hard to
comprehend its implied criterion for discriminating between members and
non-members.
At this point the reader might object that Tolstoy is being dragged
into an abstract metaphysical debate, one in which he would not want to
take part. This is not borne out by the text, however, as Tolstoy himself uses
the phrase 'external world' in his summary of the reductio argument. It is
possible that he intends to refer to everything that is not us, but again it is
the entirety of the external world that he does refer to. Therefore, it is safe
to say that Tolstoy entangles himself in this cumbersome metaphysical
debate. One clue which might shed light on why this entanglement occurs
is the subject matter that he begins to address as the metaphysical questions
begin to mount: freewill and determinism. Quite quickly, in the transition
from discussion of history and historians to that of free will, Tolstoy is led
to make difficult and often puzzling statements. He must introduce a
16 NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
distinction between consciousness and reason, which, according to him,
are separate from each other and can yield independent and often incom-
patible self-knowledge (1427). Nonetheless, he writes, "man learns from a
succession of experiments and reflections that he, as the object under
observation, is subject to certain laws" (1427). These claims seem to be
dubious, since a man is a conscious entity that cannot become entirely an
object of his own observation for the simple reason that consciousness is
itself implicated in the process of observation. Hence, it is difficult to dis-
cern what being an object of observation really means.
Even Tolstoy's hypothesized science of history—one that would sum
up an infinite number of factors contributing to an event—belies a belief in
a finite limit as well as a general conception of a specific state of all such fac-
tors at any given moment in time. Consequently, he conceives of reason as
having limited access to objective knowledge of actual states of affairs.
Reason of the sort discussed towards the end of War and Peacegoes hand
in hand with a certain view of science and of physical law—a view which was
prevalent in Tolstoy's time. Within this philosophical framework laws are
descriptions of natural phenomena (1427), and through knowledge of
these laws, the principles that govern objects may be disclosed indubitably.
In this sense laws are similar to rules that relate the movement of reality
from some initial state to a subsequent state. Based on such an under-
standing of science, reality is a necessitated progression of states of all exis-
tent things, and through reason we become adapt at discovering laws that
govern this progress of reality. Tolstoy seems to have internalized this view,
as evidenced by his statement "reason gives expression to the laws of neces-
sity" (1438). Hence, according to him, questions of 'why' and 'what' with
respect to events must be resolved by answers given in terms of laws. Causal
factors are then just conditionals that connect temporally separate states of
reality.
Given the outlined network of axiomatic beliefs regarding the nature
of reality, reason, and laws, it follows necessarily that reality is determinis-
tic. So much so, in fact, that one who adopts these views may be led to a
very hard-lined form of determinism: a view that if all of reality is in a par-
ticular state Nat time t=0, then one and only one state N' will correspond
to a particular subsequent moment in time t’, so that the initial state of
FREEWILLINWARANDPEACE 17
reality Ndetermines all subsequent states. If the following three conditions
hold: 1) all of reality is governed by laws, 2) the whole of reality is in some
definite initial state, and 3) human beings are part of this reality; then any
state of a human being is necessarily determined by the initial state of real-
ity and the laws that govern its unfolding. Tolstoy comes into very close
contact with this hard-lined view, and at times he adopts it outright. For
example he writes about causality:
The third element influencing our judgment is the degree to
which we can apprehend that endless chain of causation
demanded by reason, in which every phenomenon capable of
being understood (and therefore every human action) must
have its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as
a cause of what will follow (1434).
However, he avoids full commitment to this ultra-determinism when
he says that, despite our best attempts, it is impossible to "conceive of either
complete freedom or complete necessity" (1436). Thus, Tolstoy appears to
be acutely aware of the complexity and indeterminacy of the questions
regarding freedom that he raises. Despite this intuition the conceptual
framework within which he operates constantly pulls him in the direction
of determinism. He is so entrenched in the distinction between reason and
consciousness that he does not stop to ask what faculty is involved in the
act of 'conceiving' of man as either free or determined. Is it the limit of our
reason that prevents us from conceiving of complete necessity or is it our
consciousness? The uncertainty, which he himself admits and which he
must face, may itself be the result of an ambiguity in the distinction
between reason and consciousness.
Tolstoy's predispositions form a metaphysical bedrock that constrains
the philosophical approaches available for addressing the problem of
freewill. His views of reason, laws, and reality spur each other on in such a
way that one supposition necessitates the others. At the heart of Tolstoy's
metaphysics lies an unyielding clarity of what 'totality of existence' actually
means. It stands to reason along these lines that if all of reality is in some
definite state at any given moment, then all things that constitute this real-
ity must posses a definite nature. In turn, the definite nature of things
18 NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
dictates that there must be laws governing the way an entity exhibits its
inherent nature. In other words, the two beliefs—that laws disclose the
nature of things and that reference to the entirety of existence is in princi-
ple possible—mutually support and necessitate one another, and Tolstoy
embodies both. From this position a clear conception of knowledge and
description of reality sprouts fourth in a natural way. It becomes easy to
suppose that reason is able to trace the nature of things and subsequently,
in the limit of infinite reason, to know the future states of all of reality.
Tolstoy discloses as much about his metaphysical views when he discusses
infinite summation of causes and taking account of all conditions under-
lying an event (1437). He imagines that, at least in principle, a complete
description of reality is feasible.
It is difficult to understand what justifications are given for accepting
Tolstoy's metaphysical beliefs. He provides almost no justification for his
most fundamental metaphysical convictions within War and Piece.
Instead, they seem to be paradigmatic and indispensable for his thought,
and so it is likely that in his mind they did not require support at all. Yet,
these assumptions are the very ideas that push him towards his conclusions
regarding determinism; however, a reductio ad absurdumargument requires
that other possible assumptions of the original position are examined as
well. The most difficult of these assumptions to accept is the idea of the
totality of being—the capacity to refer to everything that exists. For one,
there appears to be no good empirical reason to suppose that such a refer-
ence is meaningful. After all, we always refer to some part of reality in rela-
tion to some other part, and we ourselves partition the range of possible
experiences in order to make our discourse meaningful. Hence, we talk of
experiences of a house or a tree, rather than all the sensory data available
at a given moment. When one smells a flower it would be distracting and
absurd to have to mention the feel of the ground as it exerts pressure on
one's feet. Just taking a closer look at everyday sensory experience demon-
strates the implausibility of referring to everything that exists. Furthermore,
such reference involves a logical leap which consists in extrapolating from
human capacity to refer to particulars, universals, and sets of universals, an
additional ability to refer to everything that exists. Although such a leap
may go unnoticed and feel very natural, extending a given capacity out to
infinity may lead to numerous philosophical traps.
FREEWILLINWARANDPEACE 19
In addition, the idea that the entirety of reality can be referenced
and held in one's mind is not supported by physical science. Neither is it
supported by the physics of today, nor was this conceptualization any more
plausible on physical grounds during Tolstoy's own time. One of the better
attempts along this line lies in conceiving of the totality of all the energy in
the universe; this would make as reasonable a boundary for physical reality
as anything else. From the law of conservation of energy, which was
accepted in Tolstoy's time, it can be supposed that a constant unchanging
amount of energy is always present in the universe. From this supposition
we can formulate the boundary of all existent things in terms of this con-
stant.
The first difficulty for such an approach is that a circular definition
underlies the attempt. The concept of energy depends on the conservation
law for its meaning. In other words, energy is typically defined as the quan-
tity which is conserved under certain changes. Thus defining the bounds
of reality in terms of energy depends on the definition of energy, which in
turn depends on where the boundary of the universe is drawn for which a
certain value is constant; this is a clear case of circular definition. Not to
mention, the constant value of total energy is zero according to the leading
science. Hence, in light of this approach, the state of reality Nat time t=0
exactly determines all subsequent states of reality for the simple reason that
the amount of energy in the universe is always the same—mainly zero.
In any case, the remainder of such a generous attempt to circum-
scribe 'everything that exists' is nothing like what Tolstoy could use for a dis-
course on determinism. In fact, referring to everything in terms of energy
is almost completely uninformative for the issues of history and personal
freedom addressed in the epilogue of War and Peace. In the epilogue the
attempt to meaningfully discuss the set of all existing things becomes even
more perplexing. Tolstoy seems to want to refer to all the people, all the
bullets, all the cannons as well as all the planets and atoms in one sweep-
ing shot. Another implication is that he would also need to refer to all
those things we currently don't even know about. Thus history would need,
like physics and mathematics, to "set out upon the new process of inte-
grating the infinitesimal unknown" (1441). This of course assumes that
history would deal with converging sums. Even with his apparent awareness
20 NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
of the issues' complexities, still Tolstoy believes that "however accessible
may be the chain of causation of any action we shall never know the whole
chain, since it is endless, and so again we never get a conception of absolute
necessity" (1437); a statement that further demonstrates Tolstoy's inability
to part with the assumption that referring to 'it' as a single chain of causes
is meaningful and justifiable.
Throughout the epilogue of War and Peaceno support for this dubi-
ous assumption is ever attempted. Yet it has several significant implications
for the discussion presented at the end of the book. Reason, as conceived
by Tolstoy, must be something that operates in transcendent space where it
can gaze at all of 'it'—the entire chain of necessitated causality. Though
human beings don't have full access to such omniscient reason, enough rea-
son is nonetheless postulated that we can know that reality as a singular
entity may, if only potentially, be taken up in a single gaze.
One implication that follows directly from believing that there is
such a thing as 'totality of reality' is that all events are determined and states
of all entities are necessitated. Essential to note are those notions that are
excluded by this assumption. Specifically, it is impossible that spontaneous
self-caused events can take place. Otherwise the possibility of referring to a
definite state of affairs of reality would be undermined. At any given
moment, a spontaneous event—one uncaused by previous states of reality—
may take place, and then the actual state of reality becomes otherwise than
the one being considered right at that very moment.
Furthermore, self-causation would run counter to every acceptable
conception of law, natural or otherwise. Description and prediction of
nature in terms of laws would have to cease, since any such prediction
would be susceptible to erratic alteration and falsification, thereby making
predictions worthless. As Tolstoy himself points out, "if there is even one
heavenly body moving freely then the laws of Kepler and Newton are
negated and no conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any
longer exists" (1440). He then goes on to say in the next line, "if there is a
single human action due to freewill then not a single historical law can
exist, nor any conception of historical events" (1440). This is a very curious
yet definitive statement, which unequivocally discloses the meaning of
freewill as it stands for Tolstoy. He thinks of freewill as a self-caused force
FREEWILLINWARANDPEACE 21
arising out of nothingness: "consciousness says: …I am independent of
cause, since I feel myself to be the cause of every manifestation of my life",
and "to imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of necessity
we must imagine him alone, outside space, outside time and outside
dependence on cause" (1438). At this point the set of claims becomes a bit
overwhelming. Why should anyone imagine freewill as a self-caused act
arising out of nowhere? It is unclear why Tolstoy feels that self-conscious-
ness provides us with a feeling of instantaneous self-causation. On the con-
trary, as is frequently evidenced by the mental life of the characters in War
and Peace, people perceive themselves as making decisions for which they
construct justifications based on past events, future aspirations, and the
affairs of the world. Never does a feeling of being in a mental vacuum over-
whelm any one of the characters in the epic. In cases of amnesia due to
shock of a wound or a paralyzing event, one grasps for memories in order
to feel oneself back in control. So, if anything, consciousness seems to give
us a feeling of being in control of ourselves. As Tolstoy skillfully argues, this
perception of control is most often overestimated, but not because people
feel themselves in possession of a spontaneously arising force.
In connection with the question of freewill, another very ancient
philosophical question is raised. The issue of personal freedom is closely
tied to the problem of personal identity. Who is Napoleon or Czar
Alexander? What does it mean to refer to a particular person? These ques-
tions naturally arise whenever it is debated whether any person exhibits
freewill; it then must be examined whether memories are parts of a person
or not. If memories are parts of a person's identity, and hence precedents
for decisions, then freewill no matter how conceived is not spontaneous
and unprecedented. Rather, there is a chain of causations and intercon-
nections among memories, which constitutes another realm of causal inter-
action. These issues are never taken up explicitly by Tolstoy, and it is hard
to see how the reductio argument may be convincing without addressing
such concerns.
Returning to the reductio argument, it is long overdue to examine
what 'absurd conclusion' Tolstoy could have in mind, which for him fol-
lows from the assumption of freewill. Given the larger agenda in War and
Peaceof discrediting historical methods which rely on powers of individuals
22 NIKOLAYTUGUSHEV
for explanation of events, it is likely that Tolstoy means that assuming
freewill leads to the absurd conclusion that individuals are responsible for
the development of history. More specifically, if freewill is allowed then
history does not follow laws, but is erratic, spontaneous, and chaotic. This
absurd conclusion does follow if freewill is completely severed from the
unfolding of reality. If man is attributed an unmitigated capacity to cause
change in the world without himself being affected, then this stands in
stark opposition to laws of history. In that case, it would be impossible that
"the number of births or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws" (1442).
On the contrary, discarding the assumption that reality can be mean-
ingfully referenced in its entirety undermines determinism while leaving
room for a possible reinterpreted version of freewill. If the whole of reality
cannot be meaningfully ascribed a single state at some instant, then laws
are always a function of other laws which dictate when specific laws are
applicable. Although laws may be universal, they must always apply to sub-
sets of reality and never to the whole of reality for the simple reason that
there is no such thing as all of reality. So, for example, although we have
laws that dictate the interaction of masses, these laws apply only under
those conditions where it is masses alone that are being considered. Thus,
the movement of masses is absolutely determined by laws of mechanics
under the condition that objects are considered as masses. Similarly,
whether an apple will fall at a given moment is absolutely determined with
respect to some state of a tree, but not determined with respect to the gusts
of wind that will topple the apple at another moment. Analogously, a per-
son may be absolutely determined with respect to certain specifiable fac-
tors, but it does not follow that this person is absolutely determined with
respect to all those factors that can influence his future states. In this sense,
laws that govern anything from atoms to civilizations are inseparable from
carefully outlined conditions under which these laws apply. The inade-
quacy of the notion of 'totality of reality' places doubt on the possibility of
laws that completely determine a given event.
After reducing determinism to a local phenomenon, nontrivially
specified and often too difficult or even impossible to identify, it follows
that actions and behaviors of human beings are determined in varying
degree with respect to a multitude of factors. These factors conflict with
FREEWILLINWARANDPEACE 23
each other and jostle for influence. Consequently, there isn't a totality of
all factors that exhaust all the possible influences on a human being. In
conclusion, by rejecting Tolstoy's metaphysical assumption about reality as
one conceivable whole, one avoids the absurd conclusion of a sponta-
neously occurring force of will. Without this axiom it is possible to imag-
ine people in control of actions to varying degrees. Some more influential
factors contributing to human action may on occasion fall within the
boundary which we call 'that person', while on other occasions a person is
more dependent on those factors that fall outside of him or her.
The assumption that there is anything like a totality of all relevant fac-
tors that determine an action or an event is at the very least unjustified by
Tolstoy. Instead it is more prudent to think that identifying the degrees of
relevance of any one factor for determining action is always a subjective
approximation; drawing the boundary of all relevant factors is always arbi-
trary and in itself as indeterminate as the boundary of reality. In this light,
contrary to Tolstoy's aspirations, history may be doomed to remain a
humanistic rather than a natural science, and in turn natural science may
be doomed to be quite humanistic as well.
Works Cited
Tolstoy, Leo. War and Peace. Trans. Rosemary Edmonds. New York:
Penguin, 1982