Aporia vol. 19 no. 2—2009
Pascal’s Wager is a Lie:
An Epistemic Interpretation of the
Ultimate Pragmatic Argument
Michael Velchik
Piquant, convincing, powerful, and mildly heretical—Pascal’s Wager is
a philosopher’s dream. But despite its initial appeal, the Wager seems
to fail on logical grounds. In truth, it is a philosopher’s nightmare.
Scholars scrutinize the Wager in isolation, using mathematics and logic
to unravel the entire argument. But the Wager is neither a mathematical
claim nor an isolated passage. Rather, Blaise Pascal intended for it to be
understood within a certain context, and for this reason the Wager should
be examined relative to its contextual bearings. Such a contextualization of
the passage indicates that the argument is not mathematical but rhetorical,
that the fundamental argument is not pragmatic but epistemic, and that
the Wager itself is a lie.
While the Wager is often thought of as its own, isolated entity, it
exists in a very specific intended context. But this is not popularly appre-
ciated. William James introduces it as the “celebrated passage known in
literature as Pascal’s Wager” (5). While many understand the passage’s
place in a greater work—James included—this introduction illustrates the
popular perception of the passage as an iconic thought, recognized primar-
ily by its own name rather than in relation to its greater context.
Determining the context of the passage is not completely straightfor-
ward. In his last years, Pascal began to write an apology for the Christian
religion but died before completing it. What remains are his complicated
and disorganized work notes, which were collected and published as his
Michael Velchik is a sophomore of undecided concentration at Harvard University.
His interests include Classical philosophy, the philosophy of religion, metaphysics,
and epistemology.
2 Michael Velchik
Pensées (or “thoughts”) after his death (Davidson 75). While it is impos-
sible to know exactly what the finished project would have looked like, it
is certain that Pascal would have published it in a different form and order
than the one seen in the Pensées (94). Nevertheless, thanks to industrious
efforts in textual criticism, it is possible to construct from the original sal-
magundi of notes an idea of how the apology would have appeared, both in
terms of specific passages and overall organization. In particular, it appears
that the Wager was meant to play an important role in the apology and
most likely belongs near the very beginning (Wetsel 13). Since the passage
clearly had an intended context, any examination of the Wager should try
to account for this by considering both the Wager’s immediate context and
its relationship to the greater argument of the apologetic work, so far
as anyone is able.
Yet most examinations of the Wager fail to account for any context
and proceed to subject it to mathematical rigor for which it may not have
been intended. Given Pascal’s reputation as a famous mathematician,
the mathematical words and concepts in the passage (such as infinity
and chance), and the inherent nature of the argument, it is tempting to
treat the passage as a mathematical argument. As philosophers attempt
to grapple with the passage by itself, they analyze it using decision theory
as a decision problem under risk (Anderson 45). They then reduce the
passage to a simplified chart and calculate the “expected utility” of each
possible outcome (47). The Wager is also decomposed into its premises
and claims (Duncan 280). After they have translated the literary passage
into the language of mathematics and logic, these philosophers quarrel
over various objections that result from the lack of rigor in the “proof”—
such as the many-gods objection, which capitalizes on Pascal’s failure to
account for gods other than the Christian one. In addition to this cavil,
there is the many-theologies objection, the St. Petersburg Paradox, and the
vague-probabilities objection, among others.1 In evaluating these various
objections, Jeff Jordan, like many scholars, tries to determine “if the Wager
succeeds” (“Introduction” 1) or if the “objection [succeeds]” (Arguments
118). In other words, does the Wager stand up to the objection in a logical
analysis or not? For Jordan, the validity of the Wager hinges upon its ability
to withstand such objections. Naturally, this approach to the Wager has
resulted in a cycle of scholastic objections and defenses.
1 The many-gods and many-theologies objections are the two most abundant. Both Anderson and
Jordan (in his Arguments), outline these objections as well as others, especially those regarding
the problems that arise when applying the Wager to various utility equations. For information
on the St. Petersburg Paradox, see Jordan, Arguments, 110-18. For information on vague probabili-
ties, an objection raised by Alan Hájek, see Duncan.
Pascal’s Wager is a lie 3
In entertaining and evaluating all of these objections scholars treat
the Wager as an isolated, mathematical proposition and subject it to the
logical and mathematical rigor associated with modern mathematics and
rationality. However, this is not how Pascal intended the passage to be
treated. As James Connor notes, Pascal makes no claims to metaphysical
or mathematical compulsion (186). This is seen throughout the passage as
the libertin (the interlocutor) makes several interjections, not one of which
relates to the mathematical aspects of the Wager. The libertin’s disinterest
in the logical aspects of the Wager may indicate that Pascal himself was not
concerned with them. The rest of Pascal’s apology is an otherwise rhetorical
and unmathematical argument. To consider the Wager as a solitary math-
ematical argument within an otherwise irrational and theological work
would be imprudent and neglectful of the Wager’s context. Additionally,
by analyzing the Wager as a mathematical proof, one strips the passage of
its literary, stylistic, and rhetorical excellence. Certainly the mathematical
aspects of the Wager are extremely provocative, which makes examining the
Wager in a mathematical context both a valuable and worthwhile endeavor
for philosophy and mathematics; however, it is clear from the Wager’s con-
text that such a rational examination is not what Pascal intended.
Pascal outlines his explicit goals and purposes for the Wager in the
immediate context. He sets up the Wager as part of “a Letter [sic] to incite to
the search after God,” in which he plans to show “that religion is not con-
trary to reason” and that one rationally ought to believe in God (52). Thus
the passage is addressed not to a believer, but to a libertin. The argument
is intended to prove to a seventeenth century French libertin in a highly
Roman Catholic culture that Christian theism is not irrational, but even to
his advantage. Even if not successful, evaluated with respect to these goals,
the Wager should be considered at least highly persuasive—indeed, the
argument to self-advantage is perhaps the most persuasive argument. But
it is precisely this self-advantage component that raises a problem. Should
not God and the belief in Him be ends rather than means? There is some-
thing inherently distorted in this self-motivated approach to faith. This
is precisely the sentiment that William James and Nicholas Rescher pick
up on. While Connor dismisses the claim (186), it is a very real one that
merits serious attention. Thus, on the surface, taking the Wager within its
immediate given context creates a problematic situation.
James and Rescher each provide an explanation. James describes
the Wager as “a last desperate snatch at a weapon against the hardness of the
unbelieving heart” (6). In other words, while the purer and nobler concep-
tions of faith are preferable, Pascal is reaching out to a defiant doubter in a
last effort to convert him. Under these circumstances, according to James,
Pascal is willing to resort to notions of less pure faith so long as to reach
4 Michael Velchik
the libertin: it is not an ideal but a last resort. However, this alone fails to
address the problem satisfactorily. Rescher continues this line of thought
and resolves the problem by placing the Wager within a larger picture. He,
too, recognizes that God would prefer to be loved for himself alone rather
than for prudential motives, but that with men such as the libertin, Pascal
must begin somewhere (121). But Rescher concludes:
The Wager argument is thus no more than a starting
point . . . A faith based on prudential self-interest is
not—cannot be—the end of the line. But Pascal sees
it as a virtually inevitable place to begin for many or
most men. To his mind what is unworthy is not his
argumentation but rather its addressees. (122)
Rescher, like James, recognizes that this method (the argument of self-in-
terest) is suboptimal. But Rescher is not satisfied with the former libertin
nurturing an impure faith based on crass considerations. He reconciles
this by viewing the Wager as the first step in the libertin’s conversion. Thus,
impure faith is not his ultimate faith, but rather an intermediate yet un-
fortunately necessary step (at least for the libertin). Though he begins as
a doubter, through the argument of the Wager he develops faith in God
based on self-interest (but faith in God nonetheless), which in time might
be refined and purified into proper faith. Furthermore, this interpretation
is strengthened by Wetsel’s belief that the Wager would have been at the
beginning of Pascal’s apology, and thus would have formed the work’s first
step (13). Thus, by envisioning the Wager within its larger context, namely,
Pascal’s greater apologetic plans, Rescher is able to reconcile the otherwise
problematic use of self-interest as an argument for belief in God.
The Wager, then, as a first step in Pascal’s apology, acts as a cata-
lyst. According to Pascal, the primary inhibitor of the libertin’s accepting
Christianity is his innate disposition against it: he observes that “men
despise religion; they hate it, and fear it is true,” and that the Wager must
act as a “remedy” for this (52). The libertin’s passions not only prevent him
from accepting Christianity but also make him ill-disposed toward attempts
to convert him. With this in mind, Bernard Howell argues, despite what
Pascal explicitly claims, that the Wager “is not an argument aimed at prov-
ing the profitableness of belief but a tactic which is intended to bring to the
surface the moral hostility that exists within the libertin towards the truths
and attitudes associated with true religion” (47). Howell understands the
Wager as more than a simple first step. He indentifies the broader purpose:
the Wager, in a sense, loosens the libertin’s hostilities, thus overcoming the
primary inhibition in the conversion. A doubter naturally resists attempts
to convert him because of his natural hostile attitude toward religion, and
Pascal’s Wager is a lie 5
thus the first step is to remove this tension. Quite significantly, Howell is
able to perceive a tacit rhetorical strategy underlying the seemingly ratio-
nal and straightforward argument. He interprets the Wager not as a rational
proof of the utility of believing in God, as some have done, but rather as a
rhetorical ploy, which is part of an overall strategy to convert the doubter.
In suggesting that the surface argument is not Pascal’s true intention, he
complicates Rescher’s conclusion. Whereas Rescher saw the Wager as a
device to incite impure faith in doubters, Howell, while still viewing
the Wager as the initial step, considers it a rhetorical device used to make the
libertin more receptive to Christianity by subduing his internal hostilities
toward religion.
The rhetorical interpretation that Howell suggests is consistent with
Pascal’s other notes in the Pensées. Indeed, Pascal appears to be rather
interested in persuasion, eloquence, and rhetoric. In particular, he notes:
“When we wish to correct with advantage…people are generally better
persuaded by the reasons which they have themselves discovered than by
those which have come into the mind of others” (4). Howell sees Pascal’s
Wager as exemplary of this perceptive observation. The Wager’s form—a
dialogue replete with interjections from an imaginary interlocutor—makes
it especially conducive to this type of correction. Just as in the Greek tradi-
tion, it leads the doubter step by step to the ultimate conclusion rather
than imposing a dogmatic truth on an unwilling and thus resistive mind.
Another of Pascal’s jotted notes reflects his understanding of the difference
between the two methods: “Eloquence . . . persuades by sweetness, not by
authority” (5). Indeed, Pascal’s Wager is a persuasion of great sweetness—
infinite sweetness, to be precise. Pascal appears to be especially aware of the
persuasive potency of the argument of self-advantage, as he observes in this
passage: “naturally men love only what may be useful to them” (57). Such
evidence throughout the Pensées corroborates the rhetorical interpretation
and helps confirm the earlier claim that the mathematical interpretation of
the Wager may not be the one Pascal intended.
This rhetorical interpretation can be further qualified by taking it in
conjunction with observations from Thomas Morris. Morris claims that
Pascal “believed that Christian theism is true and, furthermore, that a fair,
unbiased inquirer could come to see that there is a substantial body of
evidence in favor of its truth to be found in the world” (49). Evidence
in the Pensées seems to corroborate this claim. After the Wager, the rest of
the work appears to be a continuous epistemic argument for the validity
and truth of Christian theism—from positive arguments, such as that the
Christian religion alone sufficiently accounts for and explains the human
condition, to negative ones, as seen in section IX where Pascal examines and
refutes the claims of skeptics, various philosophies, and other religions. He
6 Michael Velchik
then offers as evidence various prophecies, miracles, and further proofs of
Christ. In particular, two related quotations are highly indicative of Pascal’s
belief in epistemic arguments for Christianity. In one fragment, Pascal says,
“Let us therefore examine all the religions of the world, and see if there
be any other than the Christian which is sufficient” (115). In a later note,
he concludes, “Therefore I reject all other religions” (222). In entertain-
ing the thought of conducting an evaluation of Christianity and the other
religions of the world, let alone writing a book’s worth of notes doing so,
Pascal clearly believes that epistemic arguments are not only possible argu-
ments but even sufficiently powerful ones for Christianity. Based on this
understanding of Pascal’s theology, Morris claims that the Wager is part of
this epistemic argument:
[The Wager] was intended to put us in a better
epistemic position to access the evidence that does
exist and then, perhaps, to help us develop to the
point where we are capable of having a more direct
and intimate experience of religious truth than
even the best of evidential considerations can pro-
vide. (60)
Whereas Howell’s interpretation explains how the Wager works, Morris
is able to articulate the greater purpose of the Wager. By integrating all
of the aforementioned observations into the rhetorical interpretation of
the Wager, one arrives at a convincing explanation for the Wager that
accounts both for the Wager itself and for its place in the surrounding
context: Pascal presented the Wager as an argument to address the doubter
in such a way that neutralizes the passions that interfere with conversion.
This is intended to allow the doubter to consider the epistemic arguments
for Christianity, which constitute the remainder of the Christian apology.
The visibly pragmatic argument of the Wager is in fact part of a greater
epistemic argument of the apology.
This interpretation provides a convincing explanation of the Wager,
satisfactorily accounts for its context within the intended apology, and
coheres with Pascal’s theological framework. But one glaring contradiction
stands out: the very basis for the Wager is that epistemic arguments are
insufficient. At the outset of the Wager, Pascal explains, “We are . . . inca-
pable of knowing either what He is or if He is” and that “reason can decide
nothing here” (66). This explicit renunciation of the utility of epistemic
arguments for Christian theism is entirely contradictory to Pascal’s theo-
logical framework as understood by Morris and espoused throughout
the Pensées, as well as to the otherwise sound rhetorical interpretation of
the Wager as previously expounded. The very necessity of the pragmatic
Pascal’s Wager is a lie 7
argument for the belief in God is the insufficiency of the epistemic argument,
and thus the basis of the Wager is antithetical to the epistemic argument of
the apology of which the Wager is a part.
It suffices to say that it is difficult to reconcile the Wager with the
greater apologetic argument. One possibility is that Pascal is sincere in admit-
ting the insufficiency of the epistemic argument; however, this is unlikely
in light of the previously developed arguments, especially Morris’s, which
bluntly contradict this conclusion. Additionally, this possibility offers no
explanation for why Pascal devoted so much time and effort to constructing
the succeeding epistemic arguments for Christianity, all of which appear to
be sincere. Given the quantity of the epistemic arguments, as well as their
coherency with one another and with the greater apologetic framework,
this first possibility appears doubtful. A second possibility is that the Wager
is a brilliant, provocative, but isolated thought, which, while extraneous
to the apologetic argument, Pascal nevertheless decided to include, deem-
ing the Wager such a fascinating idea that he must share it. Indeed, perhaps
Pascal fully recognized the Wager’s inconsistency with epistemic argumen-
tation but incorporated it anyway—or rather simply jotted it down as an
interesting aside among his many notes. While this explanation may be
initially plausible, it disintegrates quickly: as aforementioned, Wetsel noted
that textual criticism indicates that the Wager formed not only an integral
role in the greater apologetic work but was the beginning and indeed the
cornerstone of it, as the remaining arguments make clear.
It appears, then, that the explanation most consistent with modern
literary criticism, Pascal’s epistemic theology, and Pascal’s other notes in his
Pensées, is the inevitable conclusion: Pascal’s Wager is a lie. In other words,
despite Pascal’s own belief that faith in God can be achieved through
epistemic arguments, the Wager adopts the counter position because Pascal
recognizes that the skeptical libertin is categorically opposed to the idea
of epistemic arguments for faith. It would be too difficult to convince a
libertin of this—he would reject it because of his natural internal hostility
to the idea. Rather, Pascal appears to be following his own advice regarding
persuasion:
When we wish to correct with advantage, and to
show another that he errs, we must notice from
what side he views the matter, for on that side it is
usually true, and admit that truth to him, but reveal
to him the side on which it is false. He is satisfied
with that, for he sees that he was not mistaken, and
that perhaps arises from the fact that man naturally
cannot see everything, and that naturally he cannot
8 Michael Velchik
err in the side he looks at, since the perceptions of
our sense are always true. (4)
This passage is the key to understanding the Wager, which is chiefly
concerned with perspective. Observe the exact parallels between Pascal’s
own advice on persuasion and the Wager itself: Pascal, in trying to defend
Christianity to the libertin and subsequently convert him, is explicitly
attempting to “correct” and “show another that he errs” (4). He observes
the libertin’s perspective and admits to him, mendaciously, that epistemic
arguments are insufficient and that whether God exists or not cannot be
known. Indeed, if Pascal were to begin the conversation with the alter-
native, the natural repugnance of the thought to the libertin would turn
him away immediately. However, Pascal, cognizant of this and acutely
aware of the nature of persuasion, considers the libertin’s perspective and
entices him to entertain the Wager, which places the libertin is a signifi-
cantly improved position to receive the epistemic arguments that Pascal
renounced at the onset of the Wager. In this way, the Wager removes the
natural hostilities in the libertin, which would otherwise inhibit his receiv-
ing the later epistemic arguments. In a few tactful lines, Pascal reverses
the libertin’s perspective. Now the libertin is ready for the remainder of the
work, and Pascal may begin his epistemic argumentation. The Wager, then,
when properly contextualized, is a masterful ploy—a white lie, consistent
with Pascal’s apologetic aims and his unparalleled perception into the
art of persuasion.
WWoorrkkss CCiitteedd
Anderson, Robert. “Recent Criticisms and Defenses of Pascal’s Wager.”
International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 37.1 (1995): 45-56.
Davidson, Hugh M. Blaise Pascal. Boston: Twayne, 1983.
Duncan, Craig. “Do Vague Probabilities Really Scotch Pascal’s Wager?”
Philosophical Studies, 112.3 (2003): 279-290.
Connor, James A. Pascal’s Wager: The Man Who Played Dice With God.
New York: Harper San Francisco, 2006.
James, William. The Will to Believe. London, Bombay, and Calcutta:
Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910.
Jordan, Jeff. “Introduction.” Gambling on God: Essays on Pascal’s Wager.
Ed. Jeff Jordan. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, 1994.
———. Pascal’s Wager: Pragmatic Arguments and Belief in God. Oxford:
Clarendon, 2006.
Morris, Thomas V. “Wagering and the Evidence.” Gambling on God: Essays
on Pascal’s Wager. Ed. Jeff Jordan. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman &
Littlefield, 1994.
Pascal’s Pensées. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1958.
Rescher, Nicholas. Pascal’s Wager: A Study of Practical Reasoning in
Philosophical Theology. Indiana: Notre Dame Press, 1985.
Wetsel, David. Pascal and Disbelief: Catechesis and Conversion in the Pensees.
Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 1994.