AporiaVol. 13 number 1—2003
Conscience in Kantian Ethics
MATTHEW S. WARD
I
n the introduction to the Cambridge edition of Kant’s ethical writ-
ings, Allen Wood argues that though Kant’s ethics is tradi-
tionally considered the definitive example of a deontological or
objective ethical system (as is apparent in The Groundwork for the
Metaphysics of Morals), it actually ends up emphasizing a teleolog-
ical or subjective system (as is apparent in The Metaphysics of Morals).1
Another way to view this general shift in emphasis is by considering
Kant’s specific treatment of objective and subjective conditions of
morality in his writings. His objective condition, as argued in The
Groundwork, is the categorical imperative (CI), or the concept of duty, i.e.,
we ought to act only according to that maxim that we can will to become
a universal law.2 However, he is not entirely clear and complete in
developing his subjective conditions. Generally, the subjective condi-
tions seem to involve feelings or inclinations to act according to the
moral law. In this paper I will argue that among the subjective condi-
tions Kant discusses, one stands out as particularly important. This
distinctive subjective condition is conscience. Roughly, conscience
1Kant xxxiii.
2Kant 73.
Matthew S. Ward is a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University.
He is planning to enter medical school in the fall of 2004. This essay won third
place in the 2003 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition.
MATTHEWS. WARD 57
stands as a subjective condition for morality in the same way the CI or
duty stands as an objective condition. I will proceed by first discussing
Kant’s definition of conscience; second, by showing how it applies in a
particular case; and third, by explaining how Kant argues for the pos-
sibility of conscience.
Kant’s first significant treatment of conscience occurs in the sec-
ond Critique (The Critique of Practical Reason). It appears in the context
of a discussion of free will and determinism. It is well known that one
of Kant’s primary objectives in his work is to reconcile these two oppos-
ing doctrines. Kant here presents an argument for how freedom is pos-
sible, and in the process develops his first definition of conscience. In this
section of the second Critique, he reminds the reader of his argument in
the first Critique(The Critique of Pure Reason) regarding time as a necessary
condition for veridical experience.3 The self, as an object of experi-
ence, appears only through the pure perception of time. Because of
this fact, Kant reasons that the self is necessarily determined as an object
of experience.4 He writes: “Natural necessity…stands under…the deter-
mining grounds of every action of the subject so far lie in what belongs
to past time and is no longer within his control.”5Kant notes, however, that
the self can also be thought of as a thing-in-itself, which isn’t subject to
the pure perception of time.6 The self as such cannot be determined by
natural laws. By defining the self as a thing-in-itself, Kant shows how free-
dom is possible despite a deterministic physical world. He concludes that
because natural laws cannot determine the self, the only laws that can
bind it are moral laws.
Possessing freedom, human beings are able to choose whether or not
to act according to moral laws or duties. Freedom allows people to say that
they could have acted otherwise when considering the past. Kant now
formulates his first idea of conscience. He calls it a “phenomenon of
3Kant 218.
4Ibid.
5Ibid.
6Ibid.
58 CONSCIENCEINKANTIANETHICS
character.”7 This preliminary definition is at once insightful because it
hints at the idea that a person’s character relates to the function of her
conscience. Before Kant makes this point, it appears that character relates
only to our ability to follow the objective moral law. This phenomenon,
Kant says, is given by man to himself, i.e., it is a subjective phenomenon.8
Already, it appears that morality is going to consist of more than objec-
tive conditions. If conscience relates to moral character, and it is subjec-
tive, then morality will involve a subjective condition.
In the next part of Kant’s argument, he reasons that conscience is the
faculty that dictates the moral law. As we will see, he further develops
this idea in his next exposition of conscience found in the
Metaphysics of Morals. Freedom, the ground of the moral law, creates
the possibility that human beings could act according to the moral law.
The CI dictates to man what the moral law is. And conscience dic-
tates to man in a specific situation that he should act according to the
moral law. In effect, it tells a person: “You should do this thing.” In many
cases, conscience seems to act in this capacity in a way I will call ex post
facto. That is, conscience informs an agent after he has acted that he
should have done otherwise. Kant argues that no matter how much an
agent attempts to rationalize his parting with the moral law, his con-
science will speak silently, in the privacy of his own mind, that he did
wrong. He observes poignantly that people naturally seek to explain
their actions deterministically to escape blame. They fear punishment of
the law and so, Kant says, “human being[s] may use what art [they] will to
paint some unlawful conduct…as an unintentional fault.”9Kant also notes
that such rationalization cannot free the person from the censure she
casts upon herself.10 Even if people succeed in fooling the law to obtain
mercy for a wrongful act, they cannot escape from themselves. In an inter-
esting aside, Kant notes that this censure of self is the origin of repen-
7Ibid.
8Ibid.
9Ibid..
10Kant 219.
MATTHEWS. WARD 59
tance.11 Conscience nags to the point that one must try to make things
right.
Kant’s next definition of conscience is his most complete. In the
Metaphysics of Morals it is already apparent that Kant shifts his empha-
sis to a teleological system of morality, thus making his exposition of con-
science more pointedly subjective. Kant defines conscience as follows:
“Conscience is practical reason holding the human being’s duty before
him for his acquittal or condemnation in every case that comes under the
law.”12 In other words, conscience presents a person with his duty. Next,
Kant reasons that one cannot possibly have a duty to acquire con-
science.13 If the acquisition of conscience were a duty, then one could
inquire to discover a faculty that presented the idea of the duty to acquire
conscience in the first place. Inquiries of this sort could go on through
an infinite regress of duties and the respective faculties that present
them. Kant avoids infinite regress and argues instead that conscience is
innate.14In his words, conscience is something “incorporated into [man’s]
being…it follows him like a shadow when he plans to escape.”15Because
conscience is an innate faculty, it exists in the minds of all human beings
as an “unavoidable fact.”16Because conscience is innate, one errs by claim-
ing that a person hasno conscience. Therefore, instead of claiming that
a person has no conscience, one should say that a person gives no heed
to conscience.17 Kant catches the subtle difference between not having a
conscience and refusing to give heed to it with his use of the term “uncon-
scientiousness.”18 The fact that conscience is innate leads to an impor-
tant distinction: conscience is necessary in its possession, but not in its
application. In other words, though conscience exists in the minds of all,
11Ibid.
12Kant 529.
13Ibid.
14Ibid.
15Kant 560.
16Kant 529.
17Ibid.
18Kant 530.
60 CONSCIENCEINKANTIANETHICS
it does not necessarily lead all to the same conclusions regarding how to
act. Conscience dictates subjectively what an individual should do in a
specific situation. This statement hints at the parallel between the CI and
conscience noted earlier. The CI dictates what is right objectively.
Conscience dictates what is right subjectively. Kant also notes that the
action of conscience produces a moral feeling, further suggesting its sub-
jectivity.19As we will examine shortly, this parallel is especially important
in considering paradoxical situations of conflicting duties. We will answer
the question of how it is possible to preserve morality in situations
where the CI dictates duties that from an objective standpoint must
both be followed but practically cannot.
A final note in my treatment of Kant’s definition of conscience
comes from his discussion of the indirectness of duty.20 Kant argues that
sometimes people are mistaken in their objective judgments of duty. Duty
(the moral law) is constant and universal, but each individual’s judgment
of it can vary. Conversely, conscience can never be mistaken. As discussed
earlier, it dictates involuntarily what a person should do. In a time of
moral decision, a person wrestles with the subjective voice of conscience,
not with cold CI’s. Hence, duty, or the moral law, applies to man only
indirectly because it cannot affect man through any means other than
through conscience. If people were never mistaken in their knowledge
of the moral law, then conscience could be an objective condition. It
would always present one with moral duties. One could say, “Always fol-
low the dictates of conscience, because it infallibly presents the moral
law.” However, the moral fallibility of man precludes conscience from ever
being an objective condition. The involuntary dictates of conscience,
together with man’s moral fallibility, complicate an individual’s pursuit
of morality. Kant recognizes the difficulty and suggests two things incum-
bent upon all who desire to be moral. First, they should “enlighten
[their] understanding in the matter of what is or is not duty.”21 In this
19Kant 529.
20Kant 530.
21Ibid.
MATTHEWS. WARD 61
way they can decrease their moral fallibility. When a person is not enlight-
ened, conscience can potentially present a false duty. Kant argues that in
such situation we would not call the agent guilty, even though he did
wrong.22In these types of situations we might say that he didn’t know any
better. His wrong act would incite more pity than justice. Second, some-
one desiring to be moral should “cultivate [his] conscience, to sharpen
[his] attentiveness to the voice of the inner judge.”23 People may have a
perfectly good understanding of duty, but may be too casual in their atten-
tion to conscience. Through habit, they may come to ignore conscience
in certain situations. If these people truly desire morality, Kant suggests
that they need to develop sensitivity to the voice of conscience and act
according to it.
In Kant’s final discussion of conscience, he uses a vivid metaphor24
to analyze how conscience operates. The metaphor is helpful as a guide to
help walk through an example relevant to Kant’s definition of con-
science. In short, his metaphor describes conscience in judicial terms.
Kant portrays conscience itself as a judge, and the course of action it deter-
mines as a verdict. He notes that in any decision process, the self is divid-
ed into two parts.25The first is represented by a prosecutor and the sec-
ond by a legal advisor or defense counsel. The prosecutor represents the
moral law as given by the self. The defense counsel is a part of the self
that recognizes that though it would be ideal to act according to
every CI, it is practically impossible. The court takes place in the
mind, and the case is the specific decision to be made. I will use an exam-
ple I call the “Willie case.”26Obviously, examples can vary almost infinite-
ly in their circumstances. I use an example not to show that Kant’s ethics
can be practically applied to discover what is right and wrong. I use it hop-
22Ibid.
23Ibid.
24 He has actually already loosely used the metaphor, but he fully develops it in his last treatment of
conscience.
25 Kant, see fn. 560.
26 Thanks to K. Codell Carter for the example.
62 CONSCIENCEINKANTIANETHICS
ing to elucidate the role of conscience in Kantian ethics, and how it
might potentially operate in a specific case.
The “Willie case” involves a boy named Willie whose father is a
blacksmith and a friend to Immanuel Kant. One day, Kant and Willie’s
father are visiting in the blacksmith shop when the fire coughs and
ignites a barrel of black powder causing an explosion that knocks both
the father and Kant unconscious on the floor. Hearing the explosion,
Willie rushes to the scene to find the shop in flames. It is apparent to him
that he only has enough time to save one man. One decision process goes
as follows: Willie’s conscience tells him he should save Kant. Willie fol-
lows his conscience and saves Kant. Later on, Willie realizes he should
have saved his father and feels terrible for the rest of his life.
In analyzing this case I suggest that Willie has to decide between two
competing duties.27 The first duty is gratitude. Kant describes gratitude
as the maxim of “honoring a person because of a benefit he has rendered
us.”28Willie has a duty of gratitude toward his father. Whether or not he
likes his father, he has benefited much from what his father has given
him. In the very least, he owes the benefit of life to his father. The second
duty is beneficence. Kant defines beneficence as “the maxim of making
others’ happiness one’s end.”29Assuming Willie knows about Kant’s work
and the satisfaction it may bring to many, he has a duty to save Kant.
Even if he did not know about Kant’s work, he would still know that
Kant probably had a family whose happiness depended on his life.
As noted earlier, from a purely objective standpoint the Willie case
is a paradox. If Kantian ethics were strictly deontological, it would have
difficulty dictating a moral choice. The moral law dictates that Willie
should save both Kant and his father, but practically, he cannot do so. In
terms of the metaphor, the prosecution tells Willie he should save both,
27 I should note that a conflict of duties need not only be between two different duties. The same duty
applied to different people can constitute the same kind of conflict. For example, Willie could have a
duty to beneficence both to Kant and to his father.
28Kant 573.
29Kant 571.
MATTHEWS. WARD 63
while the defense tells him he cannot. The question arises: Does one
choice have priority over the other? Because the situation is beyond the
scope of objectivity, we must appeal to subjective conditions for morality.
Because the situation is subjective, it is conceivable that someone other
than Willie might determine a verdict different than Willie’s that would
still be moral. What is important in this specific case is that the decision
is Willie’s. Hismorality depends on the outcome. If he has trained his ear
to hear the voice of conscience, he will be able to make a moral decision.
To this point in the example, it appears that the analysis of the
situation in Kantian terms has been straightforward. Willie’s mind is
divided between two duties, and conscience will lead him to the moral
decision. How Willie finally decides on a moral verdict is less clear. I will
attempt to present a solution that remains true to Kant’s ethics. My
answer relies heavily on the ex post factotype of conscience I mentioned
earlier. It is important to note that ex post factoconscience can change as
one continues to cultivate understanding of duty. If Willie decides
after the fact that he should have acted otherwise, it will change his
feelings of guilt or innocence.30 In the table printed hereafter, I have
attempted to show Willie’s possible choices and their possible outcomes
in terms of Kant’s view of conscience. For a complete list of choices, col-
umn one would include four verdicts for “Save Dad.” The outcomes
would be the same, however, so the printed table suffices. To summarize
the table, first, Willie’s conscience will present him with a verdict invol-
untarily based on the degree of his understanding of the moral law. Next,
he will act. He has three choices: (1) Save Kant, (2) Save Dad, and (3) Run
Away. Obviously, (3) is immoral, as Willie would be ignoring CI’s alto-
gether, so it need not be considered. Following the action, Willie is left to
live his life and think about what he did. In the course of his life, if he is
trying to be moral, he is cultivating a better understanding of the moral
30 In no case is Willie ever culpable in the eyes of the law of the land. Either choice will be according
to an objective principle, which is the only principle governments can enforce. Any culpability he incurs
is inner culpability, or the pain of a disregarded conscience.
64 CONSCIENCEINKANTIANETHICS
law. What his conscience told him at the time of the act may change over
time and yield a different verdict later on. As he views his past action
from the perspective of the future, he will feel within him the voice of ex
post facto conscience. Perhaps a clearer term than ex post facto con-
science is ‘regret’. As long as he acts according to his original verdict, he
will not feel guilty immediately. However, over time, his understanding
may change. He may realize that the first verdict was wrong. If this is the
case, he will begin to feel guilty. His guilt won’t be as strong as if he
had intentionally violated his conscience.
This idea is much simpler than it probably sounds. During the
course of life, we learn and come to understand that some things we
did in the past might not have been the most moral. Sometimes we
regret our actions and wish we could have those days back. Looking
back on the past, the guilt we feel is not all-consuming. It is, more
accurately, a mild regret that gives us the resolve to change. Because
Willie realized later that he should have acted otherwise, the original act
was not moral. Again, it was not blatantly immoral as is the case with
intentional acts. As discussed before, we would say that Willie just didn’t
know any better at the time. Not knowing any better did not make the
act right; it just made it less immoral than an intentionally immoral act.
We might say Willie had a change of heart. Once a change of heart takes
place, the amount of time a person lives morally thereafter decreases the
feelings of guilt and repentance is easier. For example, in The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, some people who have significant sins
in their deep past want to be baptized. In such cases, an ecclesiastical
leader assesses the degree and time of change since the offense and pro-
vides the person with counsel regarding repentance. When enough time
has passed since a sin has taken place, the person is often baptized with-
out a problem. The version of the “Willie case” described above is item 3
from the table. If it was indeed the case that Willie decided to save Kant,
but later regretted it, item 3 most correctly describes the morality of the
situation. Willie did not act morally, but neither was his action blatantly
immoral.
MATTHEWS. WARD 65
Initial Verdict Ex Post Facto Feeling of
of Concsience Action Conscience Culpability Moral31
1. Save Kant Save Kant Save Kant no yes
2. Save Kant Save Dad Save Dad yes until yes
morality known
3. Save Kant Save Kant Save Dad no until no
morality known
4. Save Kant Save Dad Save Kant yes no
The ideal way to act is represented by item 1. Only if Willie had
acted according to the original verdict of his conscience, and continued to
feel that he made the right choice for the rest of his life, would his deci-
sion have been ideally moral. Because conscience dictates involuntar-
ily, we can also say that in his specific situation, Willie could not have
been more moral. He was not sufficiently enlightened regarding the moral
law. The fact that a person can be unable to be moral given his or her
state of knowledge points to the importance of striving for moral
progress and repentance. Ignorance of the moral law does not exempt an
agent from the demands of justice. The objective, a priori nature of the
moral law stands regardless of a person’s individual understanding.
Possibly, then, for Kant ignorance may only be grounds for a lighter
course of repentance, after which the agent can strive more seriously to
cultivate an understanding of the law and seek to obey it (moral progress).
31 Notice that the morality of each act is absolute, i.e., it does not change as the verdicts of conscience
may change. Also, in declaring the morality of an act, I have assumed that the verdict of conscience ex
post facto is aligned with a fully enlightened knowledge of categorical imperatives. Conscience ex post facto
could conceivably change again.
66 CONSCIENCEINKANTIANETHICS
I realize that item 3 as a description of the “Willie case” contains
some problems. One major problem concerns how Willie can discover a
duty in the future that would supersede the duties of beneficence and
gratitude presented at the time of the situation. Generally, one could say
that one has a duty to family, but it could be questioned whether this
duty is categorical. The answer to how Willie could act morally in the
given situation might not be found entirely in Kant’s discussion of
conscience. He discusses other subjective conditions such as moral
feeling, love, and respect in the Metaphysics of Morals that might clar-
ify some of the confusion.
The description of the Willie case presented above leads to a final
insight. This insight concerns Kant’s argument for the possibility of con-
science. I described Willie as being minimally immoral. But earlier I
noted (see footnote 30) that as far as the law of the land was con-
cerned, Willie is not guilty of anything. Why would he still be immoral?
To whom or what is he accountable for his subjective judgments? Kant
argues that such a person is accountable to God.32He continues with the
judicial metaphor to make his point clear. Kant calls it absurd to
think that a person holds court only with himself, for why would con-
science present a contradiction within itself?33 He reasons that if this
were the case, the prosecution would always lose. The prosecution would
lose because, unless one acts believing he will be accountable, that person
has no motivation to follow the moral law. Conscience would be masochis-
tic—pointlessly torturing people for their wrong acts. Instead, Kant argues
that when an individual deliberates, she necessarily thinks of someone
other than herself as the judge of her actions.34
On this point, Kant sounds suspiciously Aristotelian, seemingly pro-
posing that the standard of moral action is a moral person. But it does
not appear that another person is really a standard. The other person is
32Kant 561.
33Kant 560.
34Ibid.
MATTHEWS. WARD 67
a judge. Because the person would have to be an ideal judge, Kant calls
him God.35 At this point, Kant formulates his final definition of
conscience: “Conscience must be thought of as the subjective principle of
being accountable to God for all one’s deeds.”36Thus, immorality is pos-
sible even in situations of subjective judgment because we are account-
able to a perfectly moral being, namely, God. This explanation of subjec-
tive immorality seems correct, because even God is bound by the rules
governing objective morality. Kant’s argument presents a challenge to
those who attempt to dismiss the moral law by dismissing God.
Hedonistic atheists cannot effectively deny the existence of objective
morality simply because they don’t believe in God. By dismissing God,
they merely dismiss the judge of their conscience, and thereby circumvent
their ability to make moral progress. Thus, the possibility of conscience
being anything but an absurdity necessarily implies the existence of a
supreme judge, namely, God.
References
Kant, Immanuel. Practical Philosophy. Ed. Mary J. Gregory. Cambridge:
University Press, 1996.
35Kant 561.
36Ibid.
AUTHORNAME