Aporia vol. 11 no. 2—2001
Self-Referential Altruism
in Aristotle’s Philosophy of Friendship
J. A. West
A long-neglected aspect of Aristotle’s philosophy that has come under
close analysis only in recent years is his theory of friendship. One
question that is often asked with regard to friendship is whether
it is altruistic or egoistic in nature.1 Although in his Nicomachean Ethics
Aristotle identifies many types of friendship, my discussion will focus ex-
clusively on personal friendship. Thus, the study of Aristotle’s philosophy
of friendship leads us to an inquiry into the nature of personal friendship.
However, tension is generated in this aspect of Aristotle’s thought between
his emphasis on achieving personal eudaimonia (happiness) and the impor-
tance he places on also helping others to do the same. This tension will
be of significance in the answering the question: Does Aristotle’s philoso-
phy provide for an altruistic or egoistic view of friendship? I shall argue
that personal friendship, in the Aristotelian sense, is a synthesis of both
altruism and egoism known as self-referential altruism, which is a concern
for others, but only for those who have some special connection to oneself.2
Aristotle distinguishes between three types of personal friend-
ship: good friendship, friendship of utility, and friendship of pleasure.
Friendship of utility, which exists only because the agents are useful to
one another, and friendship of pleasure, which exists when the agents love
one another only for their pleasant qualities, are both obvious forms of
egoism, since friendships of these sorts thrive on egoistic motives, namely
utility and pleasure seeking. However, in good personal friendships, the
1 See Cooper 617–48; Burnette 430; Adkins 39, 42–43; Hardie 327–329; Irwin 393; Kahn
20–40; and Annas 1–18.
2 As far as my research has indicated, the term “self-referential altruism” was first used by J.L.
Mackie (84). Mackie has adopted the terminology from C.D. Broad.
40 J. A. West
friends supposedly love each other as ends in themselves and also love
the happiness or goodness of another person as a desirable end in itself
(Nicomachean Ethics IX.9.1170a3–16, hereafter cited as NE). Many scholars
of Aristotle’s philosophy of friendship hold that that good friendship, in
this sense, is purely altruistic.3
Generally speaking, Aristotle believes that true personal friendship
is by definition altruistic because it involves concern for the interests of
others for their own sake. The phrase “for their own sake” means that
we express concern for our friend’s interests for the sake of our friend’s
happiness and not just our own. Moreover, “whenever we love our friend
primarily for what he essentially is, rather than for his contingent and
ephemeral qualities, we therefore do like him for his own sake rather than
for ours” (Stern-Gillet 76). Aristotle offers his definition of friendship in
the same way that he might define a friend, by saying, “To be friends, then,
[people] must be mutually recognized as bearing goodwill and wishing well
to each other” (NE VIII.2.1156a3–5). Schollmeier, in his book Other Selves,
clarifies this definition by adding, “Friendship is essentially good will and
good wishes, reciprocated and recognized, for the sake of the happiness of
another person” (2).
Cooper attempts to argue that all friendships in Aristotle’s philoso-
phy are altruistic in nature. He claims that not only good friends, but also
useful and pleasant friends, do what is good for the sake of the qualities of
one another. Cooper argues that all forms of friendship are altruistically
motivated because good friends bear good wishes for one another for the
sake of their essential qualities, and useful and pleasant friends also bear
good wishes for one another for the sake of their accidental qualities. Thus,
Cooper here tries to show that although the qualities which the friends
value may be different, they still do wish each other well for the other
person’s sake and not for their own.
Even so, I believe Cooper’s argument fails on a number of grounds.
Cooper eventually admits that useful and pleasant friends only love the ac-
cidental qualities of one another for their own good and pleasure, for these
friendships dissolve if the friends no longer expect to benefit from one
another (635–38). Furthermore, with respect to good friendships, Cooper
concedes that there is an “admixture of self-seeking,” although it is not
as obvious as in the other two forms of friendship (640).4 Here it seems
3 See Cooper, Burnet, and Schollmeier as cited in footnotes 1 and 7.
4 lso note that I use the terms “good friendship” and “useful friendship” in place of Cooper’s
“character friendship” and “advantage friendship,” respectively.
self-RefeRentiAl AltRuism 41
difficult to see how Cooper can hold a position such as his while still
admitting there is a component of self-seeking even in good friendships,
for this element of self-seeking does not square well with the notion that
good friendship is a purely unselfish relationship.
Despite the self-regarding facet that exists in good friendships,
Cooper seeks to argue that these friendships are not egoistic because the
self-seeking aspect is not an essential condition of friendship. Here again,
I believe that Cooper’s argument fails to show that friendships are com-
pletely altruistic. He argues that self-seeking is not an essential condition of
friendship, but yet seems to acknowledge that it exists in all types of friend-
ship. In other words, self-seeking is non-essential yet is always present. I
would argue that since self-seeking is always present it does little good to
claim that it is not essential. Hence, for all practical purposes, it seems
that this self-seeking aspect disqualifies even good friendships from being
categorized as wholly altruistic in nature.
In contrast to the view that Aristotelian friendship is altruistic, there
are also those who have held that it is purely egoistic.5 Adkins is one such
proponent who advocates the egoistic position (39, 42–43). Adkins claims
that all types of Aristotelian friendships are “equally selfish” because
friends, whether acting for either the sake of essential qualities or acci-
dental qualities of one another, do so in order to obtain what is good
and pleasant for themselves (39). In support of this claim, Adkins makes
mention of Aristotle’s argument that persons involved in good friendships
love what is good and pleasant both absolutely and for themselves (NE
VIII.3.1156b12–23). Here Adkins asserts that a good friend does indeed
love what is good and pleasant absolutely but that what is good and pleasant
absolutely is coincidentally what is good and pleasant for himself (39).
However, Adkins’ theory is subject to objections that show that a
totally egoistic view of good friendship fails as an alternative to the altru-
istic position. Stern-Gillet, most notably, points out that “goods as can
properly be described as good unconditionally cannot be the objects of an
individual’s egoistic desires” (69). A desire can only reasonably be deemed
selfish if one’s obtaining what is desired excludes others from obtaining it.
Yet in the case of what is good unconditionally, one’s having an excess of
such goods does not result in a lack of these same goods for anyone else.
Therefore, the desire to obtain from a friendship what is good uncondi-
tionally even for one’s own sake does not necessarily mean that such a
desire is selfish. Even if it is granted that good friends seek primarily their
5 See Adkins, Hardie, Annas, Kahn, and Irwin as cited in footnote 1.
42 J. A. West
own good, whether the object of desire in such a friendship even qualifies
as an “object of competition” is open to doubt (Stern-Gillet 70).
There are further arguments against a purely egoistic conception of
friendship in Aristotle’s philosophy of friendship. Good friendship is not
categorically egoistic because the agents are concerned with the happiness
of their friends for their friends’ sake. An egoistic eudaimonist holds that
the only goal of an agent is to further his own good, but clearly there is
more to good friendship than this particular goal. Also, in Nicomachean
Ethics I.2, Aristotle says that realizing the chief good for a state is greater
than realizing it for an individual (1094b7–11). This indicates the possibil-
ity and moral goodness of an agent who self-consciously chooses as a fun-
damental goal something other than making his life as good as possible,
and Aristotle does not find such an action unreasonable. Even though it
may be argued that this might help the agent to achieve a broader goal, and
thus, indirectly, still make his life as good as it can be, this at least shows
that Aristotle is not entirely concerned with agents who solely consider
their own personal eudaimonia.6
Moreover, the egoistic eudaimonist holds that our ultimate goal
should be our own eudaimonia and that we should aim at some other goal
if and only if it is a means to, or constituent of, our eudaimonia. I agree
that in many places, especially Nicomachean Ethics I, Aristotle is undeni-
ably thinking about an agent who is aiming at his own eudaimonia. Then
again, Aristotle does not say that “the final goal of all my practical thinking
should be my own eudaimonia” (McKerlie 87). In other words, it is not
the case that I am constantly planning out how I will go about bringing
happiness only to myself.
This examination of friendship from the egoistic perspective has
shown that friendship in Aristotle’s philosophy is not entirely egoistic
in nature. The possibility for altruistic action and motivation is clear in
Aristotle’s conception of friendly relationships. Thus, it has been shown
that neither an entirely altruistic nor egoistic approach to Aristotle’s phi-
losophy of friendship allows for an accurate representation of the nature
of friendship. In order to circumvent the false dichotomy of altruism vs.
egoism, we must give recognition to the notion that altruism and egoism
need not be two mutually exclusive modes of friendship. Friendships un-
doubtedly provide opportunities for altruistic action, yet at the same time
one must not neglect the fundamental aim of realizing personal eudaimonia.
Perhaps the best approach to Aristotle’s philosophy of friendship is to view
6 See McKerlie 85–101.
self-RefeRentiAl AltRuism 43
friendship as a form of self-referential altruism, which is a class of altruism
in which the agent is indeed concerned for the interests of his friends, but
this concern also involves a particular reference to his own interests. The
synthesis of altruism and egoism can be effected by understanding that the
desire I may feel to help and advance the interests of others is frequently
limited to people who are closely associated with me.
To begin, Aristotle argues that the characteristics that define a
friendship also define a person’s relation to himself. What are these char-
acteristics? The most explicit enumeration of these characteristics is found
in Nicomachean Ethics IX.4: wishing and doing what is good for the sake
of a friend, wishing the friend to exist for the friend’s sake, living with
the friend, having the same tastes, and rejoicing and grieving in sympathy
with the joys and sorrows of the friend (1166a3–8). Aristotle then links
these traits to the relationship that one has to himself by saying, “Friendly
relations with one’s neighbors, and the marks by which friendship are
defined, seem to have proceeded from a man’s relation to himself” (NE
IX.4.1166a1–2). A simple interpretation of this is that to treat someone as
a friend is to treat that person as you would treat yourself. Yet, on a deeper
level, it is indeed interesting that Aristotle connects friendship with self-
concern. The fact that friendship with oneself is the origin of friendship
with another is the first hint given by Aristotle that there may be a mixture
of egoism and altruism even in good friendship.
One objection to my claim is that Aristotle is not trying to connect
friendship with self-concern because he translates the language appropriate
to friendship to speak of self-concern, instead of using the language of self-
concern to speak of friendship. This analysis of the ordering of Aristotle’s
comparison also leads some to believe that self-concern and friendship in-
dependently have the same characteristics and are not involved with each
other in any deeper sense (McKerlie 90–91). However, the fact that one’s
friendship is best understood in terms of his relationship with himself
cannot be avoided by any interpretation of the text. Friendship is only
truly understood in reference to self-concern, since it is friendship with
oneself that prepares and equips one with the necessary skills to engage in
friendship with others.
Another key to understanding the role that self-concern plays in
friendship is found in a remark made in passing in which Aristotle says,
“Therefore . . . each of these characteristics belongs to the good man in
relation, and he is related to his friend as to himself (for his friend is another
self)” (NE IX.4.1166a29–31, emphasis added). What exactly Aristotle
means by the term “another self” is a question deserving of its own lengthy
analysis, yet the scope of our examination will only allow for a brief expla-
nation. Another self appears to be an embodiment of our happiness in a
44 J. A. West
locally and temporally distinct individual. A self is happiness and virtue
embodied in someone who befriends, and another self is the same activity
and virtue embodied in someone who is befriended (Schollmeier 62). Our
friendships with ourselves and with others therefore appear likely to have
the same motive. The concept of another self helps us to see that friend-
ship, according to Aristotle, is inextricably rooted in our conception of
ourselves.
Another reason for believing that good friendship represents a hybrid
of egoism and altruism is that Aristotle believes that a person needs friends
to achieve eudaimonia. Aristotle contests the notion that some people are
so happy and self-sufficient that they have no need of friends. In IX.9 he
offers several arguments aimed at proving the necessity of friendship. For
example, one is more noble in helping friends than in helping strangers,
and having friends provides us with more opportunities to help others (NE
IX.9.1169b13–14). With friends one can sustain the stimulus for achieve-
ment and being in the company of other virtuous people can help improve
one’s own life (NE IX.9.1170a4–13). In short, a person will have a better
life if he has friends.
Also important in the realization that having friends will help
further our happiness is the belief that virtuous acts will always make the
agent’s life stand better with respect to eudaimonia. Acting as a friend and
having friends are themselves virtuous acts and therefore always lead to
some increase in personal eudaimonia. Viewed as a virtuous act, friendship
will then always be a self-beneficial relationship. McKerlie notes, “Chapter
8 shows that Aristotle himself refuses to admit that someone might end
up worse off in terms of eudaimonia by acting virtuously” (92). It may here
be objected that an act such as the giving of one’s own life for the life
of a friend will not serve to further one’s own happiness, since Aristotle
believes that eudaimonia requires a complete life (NE I.7, 8, 9). Also, the
good man does not always assign himself the largest portion of goods and
he refrains from doing so in order that his friends may more fully enjoy
them. Nevertheless, even in the occasion of self-sacrifice, Aristotle believes
that by laying down one’s own life for the sake of a friend the hero gains a
“great prize” (NE IX.8.1169a18–26).7 Furthermore, even though the good
man may not assign himself the lion’s share of wealth, honor, and pleasure,
he still assigns himself the greatest share of noble action. Aristotle declares,
“In all actions, therefore, that men are praised for, the good man is seen to
7 What exactly this great prize turns out to be is left unanswered by Aristotle, yet it is safe to
assume that it will serve to further the eudaimonia of the one who has sacrificed his life.
self-RefeRentiAl AltRuism 45
assign himself the greater share of what is noble” (NE IX.8.1169a35036).
Thus, it can be seen that by acting virtuously the agent will always make
his life stand better with respect to eudaimonia. It then follows that friend-
ship, as a virtuous act, will also bring about this same end. In light of this
observation, we can see how Aristotle’s claim that friendship is a crucial
constituent of personal eudaimonia reflects a self-referential aspect of cama-
raderie. Although a friend may not manifestly act for his own interests, the
result will always, or at least very often, enhance his own life with respect
to happiness.
Lastly, perhaps the best evidence that the altruism in Aristotle’s
philosophy of friendship incorporates specific reference to oneself is his
assertion that the degree of our concern for a person depends on the
nature of our relationship with that person. This point can be seen by
Aristotle’s claim that a person for whom a good man has the highest degree
of concern is himself, since he is obviously most closely related to himself.
A careful reading of IX.8 will yield the conclusion that one will love oneself
most. In the Aristotelian sense, “loving requires familiarity” and therefore
it is easiest to fulfill this requirement within oneself (Hadreas 393–401). A
resulting implication that can be drawn here is that we should care about
our close friends almost as much as we care about ourselves. This point
is exemplified in Aristotle’s discussion of why one does not wish one’s
friend to become a god. We do wish for our friend to have great goods, yet
Aristotle adds, “But perhaps not all the greatest goods; for it is for himself
most of all that each man wishes what is good” (NE VIII.7.1159a12–13)
In keeping with this line of thought, loyalty to family is more
important than loyalty to a close friend, since the closeness of the relation
is greater. Aristotle seems to take very seriously our familial obligations
and would regard the mistreating of a parent as a serious wrong (McKerlie
100). In a situation where an individual must choose between helping his
father and helping someone who has done him a great favor in the past,
Aristotle concludes that the individual should act on behalf of his father (if
he cannot help them both) (NE IX.2.1164b27–1165a2). Additionally, even
in relationships with family members, the love that we show maintains
a special connection to ourselves. For instance, Aristotle often refers to
maternal love as an example of unselfish devotion, yet he also notes that
the mother loves a child more than the father because of her more direct
knowledge that the child is her own (NE IX.7.1168a24–27). Hence, as Kahn
states, Aristotle “emphasizes the egoistic or self-regarding component even
in the paradigm case of unselfish love” (22). Also, parents are said to “love
their children as being a part of themselves” (NE VIII.12.1161b18). These
points show that family members warrant a higher degree of loyalty because
46 J. A. West
of the closeness of these persons to oneself, and that even in familial love
a connection to self-love is present.
From the above examples it becomes evident that we should care
more about those closest to us and less about those whom we do not
know as well, an insight which provides further justification for viewing
Aristotle’s philosophy of friendship as a version of self-referential altruism.
The consideration of a few more points will assist in further establishing
this case. Up to this point, we have made two significant observations: (1)
in the most important sense, a person naturally loves himself most while
still expressing concern for the interests of others, and (2) the loyalty and
love shown to a family member should supersede our loyalty to even close
friends. A third observation can now be made with regard to our actions
towards friends and strangers: just as an agent will show preference to
himself and to family, so he will behave altruistically towards his friends
instead of to all strangers. In defending his conviction that a happy man
still has need of friends, Aristotle asserts that it is noble to help others, yet
“it is nobler to do well by friends than by strangers” (NE IX.9.1169b13–14).
Concerning this kind of good will directed only towards friends, Charles
Kahn explains:
In classical times at any rate, the Greeks seem to have
had no inkling of a notion of brotherly love that could
extend to all humanity. The nearest approximation
is the Socratic doctrine that one should never harm
one’s enemies. But even Socrates does not suggest one
should love them. Just as humility is not a Greek virtue,
so general benevolence (understood as loving one’s
neighbors as oneself) is not a Greek moral ideal. (20)
Another limitation that Aristotle imposes upon personal friend-
ship is the idea that there is a fixed number of friends that one can have.
In Nicomachean Ethics IX.10, Aristotle seeks to answer the question of
whether one should have as many friends as possible. He there reasons that
one should not have an excess of friends or loved ones since “one cannot
live with many people and divide oneself among them,” and it is “actually
impossible to be a great friend to many people” (NE IX.10.1171a2–9). In
addition to this, the friends that one does have must be virtuous persons,
for only good persons can be loved in themselves, and good friendship
can only bond equals in virtue (Stern-Gillet 76). This limitation reflects
another self-regarding aspect of friendship: one presumably cannot benefit
from friendship with wicked, akratic, or irrational people, because seeking
to become virtuous is a primary goal and “a certain training in virtue
arises also from the company of the good” (NE IX.9.1170a11–12).
self-RefeRentiAl AltRuism 47
To conclude our discussion, it has been shown that Aristotle’s phi-
losophy of friendship is a version of self-referential altruism. Friendship is
capable of producing altruistic concern for others, but this concern also
contains elements of self-love. Our conscious desire to help others for their
own sake represents the altruistic component of friendship, but at the
same time the egoistic component is manifested by the fact that this desire
is often limited to people who are closely associated with us. The limiting
of our altruistic concern to the circle of close family and friends does not,
by itself, make Aristotle an egoistic eudaimonist, and it serves to show that
the love one shows to others through altruistic acts has some connection
to oneself (however great or small that connection may be).
This kind of self-referential altruism can also be defined as “a concern
for the welfare of friends, relations, and personal associates, but not for all
and sundry” (Kahn 20). I have argued that neither the wholly egoistic view
nor the wholly altruistic view of friendship in Aristotle’s philosophy gives
an adequate description of these relationships, for both approaches neglect
important considerations that are significant in our relations with others.
The self-referential aspect of friendship is apparent because (1) friendship
is first understood in terms of one’s relation to himself, (2) having friends
contributes to personal eudaimonia, and (3) the degree of our concern for
others depends on the closeness of our relationship with them. This kind of
friendship succeeds in synthesizing elements of both egoism and altruism.
Perhaps this reference to oneself, even in good friendship, manifests an
egoistic tendency intrinsic to human moral psychology. Altruism, in the
Aristotelian sense, is therefore limited to what Hume called particular as
opposed to general benevolence (Kahn 20). At any rate, human experience
in the arena of friendship repeatedly confirms that “if a friend is really to
be your friend, he must not only be good absolutely, but also good for you”
(EE 1238a3–4, emphasis added).
Works Cited
Adkins, A. W. H. “Friendship and Self-Sufficiency in Homer and Aristotle.”
Classical Quarterly, vol. 13, 1963, pp. 30–45.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by W.D. Ross, in The Basic Works
of Aristotle, edited by Richard McKeon, Random House, 1941.
Annas, Julia. “Self-Love in Aristotle.” Southern Journal of Philosophy, vol. 27,
1988, pp. 1–18.
Broad, C. D. “Egoism as a Theory of Human Motives.” Hibbert Journal, vol.
48, 1949, pp. 105–114.
Burnet, John. The Ethics of Aristotle. Methuen and Co., 1990.
Cooper, John M. “Aristotle on the Forms of Friendship.” The Review of
Metaphysics, vol. 30, 1977, pp. 617–48.
Hadreas, Peter. “Goodwill: Aristotle on the Beginning of Friendship.”
Ancient Philosophy, vol. 15, no. 2, 1995, pp. 393–402.
Hardie, W. F. R. Aristotle’s Ethical Theory. 2nd ed., Clarendon Press, 1980.
Irwin, Terence. Aristotle’s First Principles. Clarendon Press, 1989.
Kahn, Charles H. “Aristotle and Altruism.” Mind, vol. 90, 1981, pp. 20–40.
Mackie, J. L. Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong. Penguin, 1977.
McKerlie, Dennis. “Friendship, Self-Love, and Concern for Others in
Aristotle’s Ethics.” Ancient Philosophy, vol. XI, 1991, pp. 85–101.
Schollmeier, Paul. Other Selves: Aristotle on Personal and Political Friendship.
SUNY Press, 1994.
Stern-Gillet, Suzanne. Aristotle’s Philosophy of Friendship. SUNY Press, 1995.