AporiaVol. 13 number 1—2003
Aquinas on Intellect, Will, and Faith
J. A. WEST
T
he acquisition of faith in the thought of St. Thomas Aquinas is a
process best understood in terms of the relationship between the
human intellect and the will. Recent work in Aquinas’s religious
epistemology has led some scholars to categorize Aquinas as a sort of
volitionalist, i.e., one who holds that our personal beliefs can be changed
through acts of the will or that “willing” beliefs is possible. Others have
argued against this interpretation by claiming that any volitional theory
of belief leads to both logical and phenomenological problems and that
such a method of acquiring beliefs is epistemically irresponsible. In this
paper I will seek to answer the following questions: What role, according
to Aquinas, does the will play in the acquisition of faith? and Is Aquinas
correct in believing that agents can will to believe certain propositions? In
answering these questions, I shall argue that there is indeed a place for
the will in our assent to certain propositions or beliefs, and that the will
plays a crucial role in acquiring Christian faith. Finally, I will defend
Aquinas’s volitionalism against objections.
I. The Relationship between the Intellect and the Will
In order to arrive at a satisfactory answer to the above questions, it
will prove beneficial to provide a general explanation of the relationship
J. A. West, a senior majoring in philosophy at Brigham Young University, will
attend Yale University Divinity School this fall. This essay won first place in the
2003 David H. Yarn Philosophical Essay Competition.
2 J. A. WEST
between the intellect and the will in Aquinas’s philosophy. For Aquinas,
the intellect and the will are the two great powers of the mind.1The intel-
lect, simply put, is the capacity for understanding and thought, or a power
of apprehension and knowing. The intellect is “the rational agent’s cogni-
tive power.”2On the other hand, the will is “an innate positive inclination
towards the good. It is that aspect of a rational agent which disposes her to
pursue what she considers good.”3 Thus, the will can be understood as a
natural appetite or inclination for goodness. The goodness that the will
seeks is not any particular good thing, but rather goodness in general. The
act of determining which particular good to seek is the job of the intellect,
which produces evaluative judgments about certain things, events, or
states of affairs, and then presents these to the will as good. After particu-
lar objects have been presented to the will as good, the will, in turn, seeks
these objects because the will is a natural appetite for the good. So with
regard to particulars that are judged to be good, “the will is the power to
have wants which only the intellect can frame.”4In this sense, the intellect
does not move the will as an efficient cause, but rather as a final cause,
since whatever is perceived by the intellect as good moves the will as an
end.5
Nevertheless, Aquinas also holds that the will can move the intellect by
efficient causation.6Each power of the soul is basically a disposition to be
moved by a certain group of objects. For example, the power of sensory
appetite is the inclination to seek pleasure and avoid pain; the power of
hearing is an inclination to be affected or moved by sounds; and the intel-
lect is an inclination towards knowledge or truth. Whenever a particular
power of the soul is moved, the object that moves the power must neces-
1It should be noted that for Aquinas the intellect and the will are not entirely distinct entities. As
Claudia Eisen-Murphy states, “The only real agent, Aquinas recognizes, is the whole agent.” See Eisen-
Murphy 575.
2Eisen-Murphy 576.
3Ibid.
4Kenny 59.
5Aquinas, Summa Theologica(hereafter STh), I, q. 82, a. 4, c.
6See Ibid.
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 3
sarily be a good that is proper to that power. In other words, to be a cer-
tain power’s good, an object must belong to the set of things that natural-
ly move that power. In explaining how the will can be said to move the
intellect, Aquinas states, “[W]herever we have order among a number of
active powers, that power which regards the universal end moves the pow-
ers which regard particular ends.”7 Since the will is a disposition to be
moved towards the universal good, whereas other powers are only moved
towards particular goods, the will can, in some instances, move the other
powers of the soul.
In most cases, there is no need for the will to move the other pow-
ers of the soul because the other powers are usually moved by their
proper objects. When the power of sight is moved by light and color, the
will plays no part in this movement because the power’s proper object (light
or color) is alone sufficient to move the power. Yet Aquinas believes that
there are cases in which the object of the power is not sufficient to move
the power: “The sufficient mover of a power is none but that object that
in every respect presents the aspect of the mover of that power. If, on the
other hand, it is lacking in any respect, it will not move of necessity.”8
Aquinas provides an example of this in which the sight is confronted
with an object of sight that is not completely colored; even though the
object of sight is part of the class of things that move the power of sight,
it is possible that an agent will only look at the part of the object that is
not colored, and then the agent will not see the object.9When such a sit-
uation occurs in which a power’s proper good is not sufficient to move the
power, “the will can intervene by inclining to the proper good of the
power as a particular good.”10 When an agent cannot hear a particular
sound because of faintness or distance, a volition causes the agent to strain
or concentrate, or when an agent cannot see something because of dark-
ness, the will intervenes and a volition causes the agent to squint. It must
7Ibid.
8SThI–II, q. 10, a. 2.
9See Ibid.
10Eisen-Murphy 577.
4 J. A. WEST
be noted, however, that while the will can command the intellect to the
exercise of its act, it cannot lead the intellect to form specific judgments
about specific objects. For instance, the will cannot cause the power of sight
to see a color that is not actually present. The will can only command a
power to perform certain kinds of acts in pursuit of the power’s proper
object (such as truth in the case of the intellect).11
II. Aquinas’s Volitionalism
Now that we have examined the relationship between the intellect
and the will, we are in a position to see how these two powers interact in
the formation of beliefs. That Aquinas thinks acts of coming to believe
may be voluntary can be shown by his use of the verb ‘to believe’: “As
Aquinas uses it, ‘to believe’ (credere) designates an intellective act of assent
to a proposition where (a) the assent is caused not by the evidentness of
the object itself but by a volition, and (b) the assent is firm and unwaver-
ing.”12According to this definition all beliefs are voluntary, a claim which
can be clarified by contrasting a belief with an act of non-voluntary intel-
lective assent. Aquinas differentiates between voluntary and non-volun-
tary acts of intellective assent in the following passage:
If, therefore, that which the reason apprehends is such that it naturally
assents thereto, e.g. the first principles, it is not in our power to
assent or dissent to the like: assent follows naturally, and consequent-
ly, properly speaking, is not subject to our command. But some
things which are apprehended do not convince the intellect to such
an extent as not to leave it free to assent or dissent, or at least sus-
pend its assent or dissent, on account of some cause or other; and in
such things assent or dissent is in our power, and is subject to our
command.13
11See Eisen-Murphy 575–579.
12Ibid., 579. See also Quaestiones de veritate(QDV) q. 14, a. 1, c.
13SThI–II, q. 17, a. 6, c.
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 5
As Aquinas states, there are certain propositions to which the intel-
lect “naturally assents” and to which the intellect is not free to dissent.
The intellect has been created in such a way that propositions of a certain
kind or structure automatically compel its assent. Aquinas provides two
examples of propositions to which the intellect cannot refrain from assent-
ing. The first example is given in the passage quoted above: propositions
involving self-evident first principles.14 The second example occurs when
the intellect uses first principles as premises in constructing a valid
demonstrative argument in support of a proposition.15 In either case,
an agent’s belief is not voluntary since assent is compelled by the evident-
ness of the first principles.
At this point it may be objected that there are a number of non-nec-
essary propositions that still compel our assent. For example, the proposi-
tion ‘the sun is shining today’ is neither a self-evident first principle nor
an analytic truth, yet I seem compelled to assent to it if the sun is indeed
shining. Aquinas’s reply to this objection can be found in his notion of
necessity. Aquinas holds that propositions referring to states of affairs or
events in the past or present are necessarily true. Thus, both propositions
involving first principles and those involving accurate representations
of actual states of affairs or events are believed non-voluntarily.16
Despite our focus up to this point on involuntary belief, it is vol-
untary belief that is of the most importance in explaining Aquinas’s voli-
tionalism. According to Aquinas scholar Claudia Eisen-Murphy, a belief
bis voluntary “if and only if when the agent came to believe b, she could
have done otherwise.”17An agent could have done otherwise if she could
have disbelieved bor if she could have suspended judgment about b. Even
though an agent usually assents to a proposition on the basis of its apparent
truth or on the basis of evidence, Aquinas nevertheless believes the agent’s
14Examples of such first principles could be the three basic laws of logic: The Law of Identity, The
Law of Non-Contradiction, and The Law of Excluded Middle.
15See SThII–II, q. 1, a. 4, c.
16See Eisen-Murphy 583.
17Ibid., 585.
6 J. A. WEST
freedom to withhold assent or to dissent from the proposition is pre-
served. In speaking of voluntary assent, he states:
Now, that the will moves the intellect to assent, may be due to two
causes. First, through the will being directed to the good, and in this
way, to believe is a praiseworthy action. Secondly, because the intel-
lect is convinced that it ought to believe what is said, though that
conviction is not based on objective evidence.18
Thus, voluntary assent can come about either (1) because the will is
inclined towards some good to which belief is a means, or (2) because the
intellect judges the truth of the proposition to be very likely, although the
available evidence is not strong enough to compel assent. In either case, as
Aquinas points out, the will is the force behind the intellective assent. It
is this claim—that the will plays a role in belief acquisition—that identifies
Aquinas as an advocate of volitionalism.
The next step in our discussion of Aquinas’s volitionalism is to
determine exactly what kind of volitionalist Aquinas is. Volitionalism, in
its most extreme form, holds that we can get ourselves to believe any
proposition by merely “willing” to do so. However, as we have seen, the
will only plays a part in someof our belief forming processes, and even then
the will is not the only power involved. Indeed, Aquinas’s thought can be
understood as advocating a brand of volitionalism much weaker than the
extreme form, and, as we shall discuss now, less direct.
Aquinas asserts that the will is inclined towards the general good
and that the will can intervene or “fill the gap” when the object of the
intellect is not sufficient to compel assent. One way in which this hap-
pens is that the will can lead the intellect to assent to a certain proposition
“because it perceives assent to this proposition as a means of acquiring a
true belief, and therefore as a good.”19Irrespective of the will’s inclination
towards the good represented by the proposition, the agent still remains
18SThII–II, q. 5, a. 2, c.
19Eisen-Murphy 589.
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 7
free to assent or dissent from the proposition. Assent is therefore still a
choice the agent makes, and thus it can be said in this case that the belief
is voluntary. However, the question of exactly how the will intervenes
remains. In order for the will to move the intellect to assent, and in order
to preserve the truth basis of an agent’s set of beliefs, the will must get the
intellect to somehow judge that the proposition in question is more likely
to be true than not. Consequently, the will gets the intellect to arrive at
the likely truth of the proposition by working through other acts of the
intellect, such as focusing on one kind of evidence over another, paying
attention to certain kinds of facts and disregarding others, or giving more
weight to some pieces of the evidence and less to others. In doing so, the
will gets the intellect to judge that the proposition is most likely true and
thus the will is able to command the intellect to assent. From this perspec-
tive, Aquinas can be seen as advancing a type of indirectvolitionalism.
To further qualify Aquinas’s volitionalism, we shall make use of the
following schema devised by Louis Pojman in The Logic of Subjectivity:
Direct Indirect
Descriptive 1. I will to believe p, 2. I will certain actions
and, by doing so, and life policies, and
acquire the belief these cause the beliefs
that-p directly. I eventually acquire.
Prescriptive 3. I ought to will to 4. I ought to set myself a
acquire a belief that-p specific course of action
by directly willing to in order to acquire a
do so. specific belief, p, which
the evidence alone does
not cause.20
20Pojman 105.
8 J. A. WEST
Pojman notes that one could be a descriptivist without being a pre-
scriptivist; that is, one might believe that it is possible to attain beliefs
directly through willing to do so, but that we ought not attain them in that
way. On the other hand, it is not possible to be a prescriptivist without
being a descriptivist; that is, if one is to have some duty to acquire beliefs
by willing to do so, then it must be possible for one to attain beliefs in
such a way.21
Aquinas, I believe, can best be classified as an indirect descriptive
volitionalist. Indirect because, as we saw earlier, the will plays an indi-
rect role in belief formation, and descriptive rather than prescriptive
because an agent does not consciously set out to acquire beliefs through
the will; the intervention of the will is simply a natural functioning of the
agent’s power, which automatically follows its innate inclination towards
the good.
III. Volitionalism and Faith
Not only does the will play an important role in the acquisition of
ordinary beliefs, but Aquinas also believes that the will is essential to
faith. The proper object of faith is God himself, but since human know-
ers, in this life, cannot comprehend God directly or immediately, the
object of faith is not God but propositions about him.22 Assent to the
propositions of faith (such as the proposition ‘God exists’) is a case in
which the assent is not generated by the intellect’s being sufficiently
moved by its object. The assent of faith is produced by the will being
moved sufficiently by the object of faith and therefore the intellect is
brought to assent. Faith, however, is different from opinion. Opinion also
results from the will moving the intellect to assent, but in the case of opin-
ion, the agent recognizes that there is evidence both for and against the
proposition and hence the agent must admit that the knowledge is not
21See ibid.
22See SThII–II, q. 1, a. 2
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 9
completely certain. Faith, unlike opinion, holds to its object with certain-
ty, and in this sense is like knowledge.23
The contribution of the will to the intellectual assent in faith occurs
because of the will’s natural inclination for goodness. The will is moved
by considerations of the willer’s happiness andby considerations of God,
who is himself the true good. When an agent is presented with the propo-
sitions of faith, she sees that these propositions represent the combination
of the two ends mentioned above, namely, the eternal life and happiness
of the willer in union with God. Even though these propositions are not
sufficient to command assent on the part of the intellect, the will recog-
nizes the great good offered by assent to these propositions, and the will
thus influences the intellect to assent.24 As Eleonore Stump points out,
that the will can have such an influence over the intellect is attested to by
the fact that scientific experiments are often designed “to rule out just this
kind of influence,”25 where the desire to have the results turn out a
certain way may affect the conclusions of the researchers.
IV. A Defense of Aquinas’s Volitionalism
A number of objections have been raised against Aquinas’s views on
the role of the will in assent and the implications that this theory has on
our understanding of faith. Since the scope of this paper does not allow
for a complete treatment of these objections, I shall focus my discussion
on a few of the most common objections to Aquinas’s volitionalism.
Another reason for narrowing the focus of my defense of Aquinas is that
most of the contemporary criticism leveled against volitionalism tends to
attack the notion of direct voluntary belief. Aquinas, however, as I have
shown, advances an indirect brand of volitionalism that is able to escape
the objections to direct voluntary volitionalism. Aquinas does not argue
23See SThII–II, q. 1, a. 4; q. 2, a. 1, 2.
24See Stump 187–88.
25Ibid., 188.
10 J. A. WEST
that the will can command the intellect to assent to a proposition that
is patently false, and Aquinas undoubtedly recognizes the fact that we
often enough assent to propositions that we passionately wish were not
true. Nevertheless, there are still objections that can be raised against
Aquinas’s weaker version.
Objection 1. Perhaps the most common and most obvious objection
to Aquinas’s notion of voluntary belief is that it seems to imply that faith
is without epistemic justification. Stump states: “If a believer’s intellectual
assent to the propositions of faith results primarily from her will’s being
drawn to the good represented in those propositions, there seems to be no
reason for supposing that the propositions of faith are true or that her
belief in them is justified.”26After all, we have a propensity to think of our
beliefs as propositional attitudes that are caused by the reality that sur-
rounds us. Beliefs, we suppose, are caused by evidence, and not our voli-
tions. In other words, it is contrary to the nature of beliefs to acquire
them by anything other than truth/evidence considerations.
Objection 2. If the object of faith is not sufficient to move the intellect,
and if the acquisition of faith is based largely on the act of the will, how
can Aquinas say that faith is held with certainty? Aquinas states that faith,
as a form of belief, is not caused by the evidentness of the object itself, but
nevertheless is “firm and unwavering.”27 Recognition of the fact that our
faith is not based entirely upon truth considerations seems to give rise to
doubts about how anyone’s faith could be said to be certain.
Aquinas’s answers to both of the above objections can be found in
his account of “being” and “goodness.” On Aquinas’s view, the terms
“being” and “goodness” are basically synonymous. More accurately, these
terms refer to the same thing but with different senses (Stump exemplifies
26Ibid., 191–92.
27See Eisen-Murphy 579, and Quaestiones disputatae de veritateq. 14, a. 1, c.
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 11
this by stating that the expressions “being” and “goodness” are analogous
to the expressions “morning star” and “evening star,” which refer to the
same thing but under two different descriptions).28However, for the pur-
poses of our discussion, we will simply equate these two terms.
Objection 1, that the propositions of faith are unjustified, and objec-
tion 2, that one cannot truly have a sense of certainty with regard to faith,
can be answered by using an example of such a proposition of faith.
Take for instance the proposition ‘God exists’. Now, for Aquinas, where
there is being there is also goodness, and conversely, where there is good-
ness there is also being. In the case of God, who we think to be perfect-
ly good, Aquinas holds that this perfect goodness must correspond to per-
fect being, and perfect being not only exists but exists necessarily.29 In the
case of ordinary beliefs, where the will may be inclined towards an imper-
fect or limited good, the assent may be unjustified. Yet with regard to the
propositions of faith, the will seeks perfect and unlimited goodness since
the object of faith is First Truth—God himself—and this perfect goodness
assures the existence or being of the will’s object. Belief, then, in proposi-
tions such as ‘God exists’ is justified since the object of faith must neces-
sarily exist.
Objection 3. Why should Aquinas believe that faith should be
obtained through the will’s hunger for the good rather than the intellect’s
being sufficiently moved by the propositions of faith? An omnipotent and
omniscient God could have made the propositions of faith manifest in
such a way that the intellect could be sufficiently compelled on account of
the evidence. There seems to be something inappropriate about obtaining
faith through the will’s attraction to the good when God could have made
it possible to obtain it based on considerations that alone move the intel-
lect. Aquinas’s account of faith, one might contend, is analogous to “using
a sewing machine to join two pieces of cloth by gluing the two pieces of
28See Stump 192.
29See Ibid., 197.
12 J. A. WEST
cloth together and using the machine as a weight to hold them in place
as the glue dries.”30 Why opt for a substitute method of acquiring faith
when God could have easily provided a better, more compelling method
involving the intellect alone?
This objection will likely seem absurd to most Christians, for the
whole idea of faith is that it is not intellectual certainty, but a kind of risk
in which the truth of our beliefs is something hoped for. Most Christians
would claim that God’s fully manifesting himself to all people would con-
tradict his desire to have people freely enter into relationships with him.
Nonetheless, it could still be argued that God is perhaps guilty of not pro-
viding enough evidence as it is. Aquinas’s reply to this objection is
found in his understanding of the purpose of faith.
Objection 3 might have more force if Aquinas agreed that the most
important aspect of faith was its influence on the intellect, but Aquinas
affirms that the most significant feature of faith is its influence on the will
of the believer. The changes brought about in an agent by the acquisition
of faith are, more than anything, changes in the will of the agent. When
an agent begins to have faith through the will’s attraction to perfect good-
ness, God is then able to work on the will of that believer in order to pro-
duce a true change of heart and align her will in other aspects with the
righteous desires of the heart that a true Christian should possess. The
changes that take place after the assent of faith which are of the most
importance in making the agent a true disciple are changes in the will
of the agent to love goodness and hate sin. It is this change that constitutes
the notion of justification by faith, in which inherent defects in the
human will (in the form of desiring that which is evil or gives immediate
pleasure) are corrected and the heart and will of the believer are brought
into line with God’s will. Thus, Aquinas holds that the method of acquir-
ing faith through the will, as opposed to a purely intellectual approach, is
better because it involves the will in the search for faith and places the will
30Ibid., 192.
AQUINASONINTELLECT, WILL, ANDFAITH 13
in a position to be further corrected and purified. While it should be
noted that whatever affects the will must have first operated on the intel-
lect, the purpose of the change that the intellect experiences through gain-
ing faith has to do with the resulting change in the will.
V. Conclusion
In this paper I have argued that Aquinas presents a brand of voli-
tionalism in which the will has an indirect and descriptive role in the
acquisition of faith. To show this, I have explained Aquinas’s account of
the relationship between the intellect and the will, and how these come
together when one assents to the propositions of faith. I have also
defended Aquinas’s view against the objections that (1) assent to the
propositions of faith is unjustified, (2) the believer cannot be said to real-
ly hold to her faith with certainty, and (3) God should have instituted a more
intellectually based approach to faith acquisition. While perhaps the most
persuasive evidence that our religious beliefs must be arrived at voluntar-
ily is the fact that God appears to hold people accountable for their
beliefs, Aquinas still manages to offer a coherent account of how and why
this is so.
References
Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologica. Fathers of the English Dominican
Province, 1947. New Advent, URL = http://www.newadvent.org/
summa.
Eisen-Murphy, Claudia. “Aquinas on Voluntary Beliefs.” American
Catholic Philosophical Quarterly, Fall 2000, 74(4): 569–97.
Kenny, Anthony. Aquinas on Mind. New York: Routledge, 1993.
Pojman, Louis. The Logic of Subjectivity: Kierkegaard’s Philosophy of
Religion. University, AL: University of Alabama Press, 1984.
Stump, Eleonore. “Aquinas on Faith and Goodness.” In Being and
Goodness: The Concept of the Good in Metaphysics and Philosophical
Theology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991. 179–207.