Aporiavol. 17 no. 1—2007
Why Cannot My Beliefs Fit?
SAMWIEST
T HOMASNagel, in his book The Possibility of Altruism, argues that desires
are not the basis for all motivation. Nagel distinguishes between moti-
vated and unmotivated desires and argues that some reasons can be traced
to unmotivated desires (emotions, urges, etc.), but he argues that it has
yet to be shown that all reasons for action must be traced back in this way.
Nagel concludes that motivated desires, motivated by practical judgments,
are a possible cause of motivation. Peter Ross, in his article “Explaining
Motivated Desires,” compares two approaches to the motivational ques-
tion: what he calls Nagel’s “rationalist” view and the “Humean” view. At
the end of his article, Ross argues that the rationalist and Humean views
turn out to be so similar that the problem must be resolved by claims about
moral judgment. In this article, I argue that Ross seriously misconstrues the
rationalist view, in particular Nagel’s view, and thus his misrepresentation
undermines his conclusion that the rationalist and Humean views are so
similar. To do this I will summarize both Nagel’s and Ross’s arguments,
review their terminology, and then show that Ross’s argument (that the
“directedness” of beliefs and of “states” needs goals) shows a misunder-
standing of Nagel’s argument.
I will begin with how Ross presents the dispute. Ross defines two
camps: the rationalists and the Humeans. Both of these camps are inter-
nalists; they believe that we are always motivated when we act, or that we
act because we are motivated internally. The alternative view is external-
ism, which says we can act from external constraints. The disputebetween
Sam Wiest received a BA in philosophy from Brigham Young University in April
2007. This fall he will attend Penn State’s Dickinson School of Law. This essay won
first place in the 2007 David H. Yarn Essay Contest.
2 SAMWIEST
the rationalist and Humean camps is about how to explain motivation
for action. Ross explains that the Humeans believe desires to be the cause
of motivation and that the rationalists believe motivation can be
explained in terms of reason and belief. Ross uses Nagel’s rationalist
argument from The Possibility of Altruism where Nagel makes a key dis-
tinction between motivated and unmotivated desires. Ross describes
unmotivated reasons (by quoting Nagel): “[Unmotivated reasons] . . .
‘simply come to us’ independently of having (conscious or unconscious)
reasons for them” (199). Nagel describes unmotivated desires as being like
“appetites,” “emotions,” and as states that although they can “assail” us,
can be explained (29). Unmotivated desires are thus desires such as
hunger or urges such as seeing a candy bar you like and immediately
wanting one. Unmotivated desires are contrasted by motivated desires,
which Ross describes as desires had for reasons (199). An example of a
motivated reason may be deciding after deliberation that it would be bet-
ter to stay up and work on a paper than to go to sleep early. (I will discuss
the nature of motivated desires below.) Beliefs and reasons do not explain
unmotivated reasons at all; thus, unmotivated reasons are not of interest
to us and will not be analyzed henceforth.
Ross presents Michael Smith’s argument in favor of the Humean
view that all motivation stems from desire. Ross defines two types of rea-
sons, motivating and normative, and two types of explanations, teleological
and justificatory. Motivating reasons are “constituted by goal-directed
intentional states” (200). Ross never explicitly explains what exactly Smith
means by a “state,” but I will assume he means a mental or psychological
state, as in a disposition of some sort. The goal of these goal-directed inten-
tional states is served by these intentional states—in other words there is a
goal, and the point of these intentional states is to reach that goal. Thus,
motivating reasons motivate because we have some intentional states or
dispositions, etc., that aim at some goal, and acting would satisfy them.
Teleological explanations explain motivating reasons. A teleological expla-
nation explains a motivating reason in terms of goal-directed intentional
states. What Smith seems to be saying is that we have many of these inten-
tional states, and some of them point to the same goal; that is why we have
that goal. A normative explanation is a “propositional content on the basis
of which the contents of these [mental] states can be justified from the
standpoint of some system of normative rules” (Ross 200). Justificatory
WHYCANNOTMYBELIEFSFIT? 3
explanations explain normative reasons in terms of some system of nor-
mative rules. I assume this refers to something such as not jaywalking
because it is against the law (the law being the system of normative rules)
or not lying because it violates Kant’s categorical imperative.
One last definition brings in the conclusion of Smith’s argument, that
of “direction of fit.” There are two kinds of fit, also called directions of fit:
mind-to-world and world-to-mind. The mind-to-world fit is when our
minds fit the way the world actually is. World-to-mind fit is when we want
the world to fit how our mind is. Another way to describe it is that the
mind-to-world fit represents the world as it is, and the world-to-mind fit
represents the world as it is to be (Smith, The Moral Problem7). Smith argues
for the Humean view using motivating reasons in the following manner:
(1) I have a motivating reason.
(2) Teleological explanations explain motivating reasons.
(3) Teleological explanations explain motivating reasons in
terms of goal-directed states.
(4) Goal directed states are a world-to-mind fit.
(5) Desires are world-to-mind fit states.
(6) Beliefs are mind-to-world fit states.
(C) Therefore, motivating reasons, and thus motivated desires,
are explained in terms of desires, not beliefs.
Smith sums it this way, “The motive that motivates the desire must there-
fore embody some goal of the agent. But no belief could do that, for beliefs
are not the right kind of state to embody the having of goals” (“Reason and
Desire” 251–52).
I will start with motivating reasons and goal-directed intentional
states. Motivating reasons are defined in terms of goal-directed inten-
tional states, and this definition or explanation of motivating reasons is
teleological. If we have a motivating reason, we have it because we have
goal-directed intentional states, but what exactly is a goal-directed inten-
tional state? Ross, via Smith, defines a goal-directed intentional state as
4 SAMWIEST
a state that has a world-to-mind fit; in other words, he defines it as a desire.
But what is a desire? And how do we find or gain a new one? Ross seems
content to say that a motivating reason is explained by a desire, and that is
why motivation is always caused by a desire. But a goal-directed state is not
a sufficient explanation of what a desire is. A state can be some state of
being or disposition, so does this include things like appetites or emotions?
I will assume this is what is intended and appeal to Nagel’s example of a
soda pop and dime. (33–34). The example is that of getting thirsty and put-
ting a dime in a soda pop machine in order to get a drink. It is clear that in
this example an unmotivated desire is present: thirst, which, although it can
be explained, simply assails me. However, I may be able to reason myself into
being thirsty; for example, I prepare to do an athletic activity and need to
stay hydrated. But let us say in our (Nagel’s) example that I am thirsty sim-
ply because my body is running out of water and is telling me to seek water.
At this point it can be said that I have a goal-directed intentional state. My
state is thirst, and my goal is to drink something refreshing.
So far, Smith’s definitions can explain the situation, but here the
problems start. This is because simply having this unmotivated desire is
not sufficient to be motivated to put a dime in a slot: it “seem[s] mysteri-
ous that thirst should be capable of motivating someone not just to drink,
but to put a dime in a slot” (Nagel 33). I have the desire to quench my
thirst, but not to put a coin into a slot—the urge to put a coin into a slot
has never occurred to me. Something more is needed, and that is reason
or deliberation. I reason (from prior experience, observing others, etc.)
that in order to obtain a can of pop, I will need to insert a coin into the
slot. After reasoning that putting a coin in the slot a can of pop will come
out, I am motivated to do it, and only then do I have a desire to put a coin
in the slot. This is a clear case of having an unmotivated desire (thirst) and
in order to fulfill that unmotivated desire, I reason to some further action.
I derive motivation to do that further action not from my unmotivated
desire, but from reason. After deriving a motive to do this further action,
I desire to act.
Let us see how this example fits into Ross and Smith’s terms. We
can distinguish two motivations (although there may be more) that need
explaining. They are to quench my thirst and to insert a coin into the
slot. In the first case the motivating reason is thirst. The teleological
explanation, in terms of a goal-directed intentional state, is that my body
WHYCANNOTMYBELIEFSFIT? 5
seeks to stay hydrated. The fit of this state is world-to-mind because the
mind is looking for the world to satisfy its needs. The motivation to quench
my thirst has thus simply assailed me and fits Nagel’s description of unmo-
tivated desires. Thus, the first motivating reason is caused by a desire, as
Smith contends.
The second motivation is to insert a dime into the slot. The motivat-
ing reason is to obtain a can of pop (to quench my thirst). The teleological
explanation of this motivating reason, in terms of goal-directed intentional
states, is that I have reasoned that inserting a dime in the slot will produce
a soda pop with which I may quench my thirst. By that reasoning I have a
desire to put the coin in the slot. But this is not a unique goal-directed
intentional state—this desire to put the coin in the slot is not an additional
desire, and this is the difference between Ross and Smith’s view and Nagel’s
view. I derive the desire to put the coin in the slot by the nature of reason.
As Nagel describes: “[The desire to insert the coin in the slot] is a desire
motivated by thirst plus certain information” (34). There need not be
mention of any other desire, or directional state, in order to explain my
motivation to insert the coin into the slot. There is no need because of
the nature of reason: by having a desire, we automatically desire the
means to the end. “Reasons are transmitted across the relation between
ends and means, and that is also the commonest and simplest way that
motivational influence is transmitted. No further desires are needed to
explain this phenomenon” (Nagel 33). On this account there is no need
for an additional desire.
As cited above, Smith says, “The motive that motivates the desire
must therefore embody some goal of the agent. But no belief could do that,
for beliefs are not the right kind of state to embody the having of goals”
(The Moral Problem251–52). Above I have effectively shown that beliefs may
embody goals. Let us say I am motivated to act on some means. I am moti-
vated to act because I have reasoned that through these means I may
achieve a desired end. In this case my desired end is to satisfy an unmoti-
vated desire. My reasoning is therefore based on the belief that the means
will bring about the end. Thus, my motivation, which comes from a reason
based on beliefs, may embody my goal because “reasons are transmitted
across the relation between ends and means” (Nagel 33). Because I have a
reason to believe that a certain act will satisfy a desire of mine, I am auto-
matically motivated to do that act and no further desire is necessary.
6 SAMWIEST
Smith seems to be saying in this quotation, “One cannot have a desire
without having a desire.” Smith’s use of the phrase “the motive that moti-
vates” must mean the reason that motivates the desire.
Why is it not the case that I can be motivated from practical judg-
ment? Why do all desires have to be motivated by further desires? Smith
says that if I have a goal (a desire, whether motivated or not) then that goal
must be explained by some state that is goal-directed. But by “goal-
directed state” Smith means another desire. Where do the desires end? If
all desires have to be explained in terms of other desires, then all motiva-
tion would come from unmotivated desires, and the only reasons we
would ever do anything would be because we have some type of urge or
appetite to act. It is absurd to say that my motivation to get out of bed this
morning was because of some urge or appetite (or some other unmoti-
vated desire), especially because all the messages my body sent me this
morning indicated that I should stay in the warm, restful environment;
nevertheless, I got up. I have described a situation, my thirst and the soda
pop, in which I derive motivation not from a desire, but through reason-
ing. I reasoned that I could obtain a soda pop by inserting a dime into the
slot. Through this realization I was motivated to do so; there is no need for
talk of a desire.
In the introduction of his article, Ross states that Nagel tries to
prove that we can “explain motivation for action in terms of reason and
belief alone” (199). I agree with this statement, although it may be a little
deceptive. It may be better to say that Nagel sets out to prove that it is pos-
sible to explain motivation for action in terms of reason and belief alone;
however, Nagel never explicitly states this. At the beginning of his chapter
entitled “Desires,” in which he makes his important distinction between
unmotivated and motivated desires, Nagel states his goal for the chapter is
to “argue that . . . accounting for all motivations in terms of the agent’s
desires will not work, and that the truth is considerably less obvious and
more significant” (27). Nagel goes on to explain that “other motivating fac-
tors besides desire may be present among the conditions for the existence
of those reasons [for motivation]” (32). Nagel gives an argument that has
been hinted at in this paper by my argument that if all motivation must
stem from further desires, then we are all acting from unmotivated desires.
If a practical judgment is not motivational, and practical reasoning is possi-
ble, then some further argument with a motivational conclusion is needed;
WHYCANNOTMYBELIEFSFIT? 7
however, one can always ask, “Why should I do that?” of all arguments.
Thus, either practical judgments are motivational, or practical reasoning is
not possible. Practical reasoning is possible; therefore, practical judgments
are motivational.
Nagel shows that explaining motivation through desires alone does
not work and that it is possible to be motivated by practical judgments.
Ross, via Smith, attempts to give an argument that motivation must be
explained in terms of desires, using terms that imply that motivation only
comes from desire. We have seen that this is not the case, because moti-
vation may be explained in terms of belief and reasoning. However, why
cannot I be motivated by other things as well? My point is that Ross and
Smith try to show that we can only be motivated by a narrow explanation of
desires, but if we think about our everyday experience, it seems that our
motivations can come from many different sources, including practical judg-
ment, belief, and reasoning. Why cannot a person help another because
they think it the right thing to do, and that is the end of the explanation?
Or what would stop me from saying, “My shoe is untied, so I want to eat a
candy bar”? Even though the idea may seem strange, and the two things
totally unrelated, it seems that different people may have many different
reasons and motivations for action. Restricting motivation to explanations
in terms of unmotivated desires, urges, hungers, etc., seems strangely restric-
tive and not indicative of everyday experience. We are filled with more
than just goal-directed intentional states, and these other things may also
motivate us.
Works Cited
Nagel, Thomas. The Possibility of Altruism. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1970.
Ross, Peter. “Explaining Motivated Desires.” Topoi21.1–2 (2002): 199–207.
Smith, Michael. “Reason and Desire.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
88 (1988): 243–58.
———. The Moral Problem. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 1994.